  Custom Search  Search... Random Tropes Random Media TVTropes TROPES  MEDIA  INDEXES  FORUMS  Report Advertisement Follow TV Tropes  Browse TV Tropes Ask The Tropers Trope Finder You Know That Show... Trope Launch Pad Reviews DISPLAY OPTIONS  Show Spoilers  Night Vision  Sticky Header  Wide Load  Report Advertisement Crucial Browsing Genre Media Narrative Other Categories Topical Tropes  Report Advertisement Community Showcase Explore More     Report Advertisement  Watch  Edit Page   Reviews  Related  Discussion  History More     Share Franchise / Gundam Anime  Awesome  AwesomeMusic  Characters  FanficRecs  Franchise  Funny Headscratchers  HoYay  NightmareFuel  Pantheon  Quotes  TearJerker  Trivia  WMG YMMV  More  Create New "It's a Gundam!!" — The Last Words of many a Mook in the franchise, as demonstrated here. Gundam is a long running series of Humongous Mecha Anime shows started by Yoshiyuki Tomino in , Trope Maker for the Real Robot genre, and basically the Japanese equivalent of Star Trek. Gundam is a Cash Cow Franchise and a veritable merchandising empire, encompassing not just televised anime, but also manga, OVAs, video games, plastic models, toys, theme park rides and a racing team sponsorship. Its works include: Anime Mobile Suit Gundam  Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam  Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ  Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack  Mobile Suit Gundam : War in the Pocket  Mobile Suit Gundam F  Mobile Suit Gundam : Stardust Memory  Mobile Suit Victory Gundam  Mobile Suit Gundam: The th MS Team  G-Saviour  Gundam Evolve  Mobile Suit Gundam MS IGLOO  Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn  Mobile Suit Gundam: The Origin  Mobile Suit Gundam Thunderbolt  Mobile Suit Gundam Twilight AXIS  Mobile Fighter G Gundam  Mobile Suit Gundam Wing  Mobile Suit Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz  After War Gundam X  Turn A Gundam  Mobile Suit Gundam SEED  Mobile Suit Gundam SEED MSV Astray  Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny  Mobile Suit Gundam SEED CE.: Stargazer  SD Gundam Force  Mobile Suit Gundam   Mobile Suit Gundam  the Movie: A Wakening of the Trailblazer  SD Gundam Sangokuden Brave Battle Warriors  Model Suit Gunpla Builders Beginning G  Mobile Suit Gundam AGE  Gundam Build Fighters  Gundam Build Fighters Try  Gundam Reconguista In G  Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans  Gundam Build Divers  Related Works Gundam Expanded Universe Gundam works are generally stories about how War Is Hell, covering conflicts between different groups of people fighting World War Whatever over ideology, resources, and other familiar real world issues — as opposed to fighting an Alien Invasion, Robot War, or other external threat. This conflict usually takes the form of the established Earth government fighting against people living in the enormous space colonies in Earth orbit in a downplayed form of The War of Earthly Aggression . The plot of a Gundam series usually falls into one of two archetypes. The original version was an Ordinary High-School Student getting drawn into the ongoing war against his will when The Empire attacks their Doomed Hometown; they end up Falling into the Cockpit of the latest Super Prototype Gundam in order to save themselves and/or their friends, and gradually grow into an Ace Pilot in their own right. A variation of this arose as the franchise expanded, where the protagonist is a Child Soldier and already an Ace Pilot at the beginning of the story, sent on an important mission to use their powerful Gundam to strike a devastating blow against their enemy. Either way, the series is usually a Coming of Age story, where the protagonist suffers trauma and loss during the course of the conflict, but grows as a person in the process of examining their motivations and their place in the world and eventually deciding how to best live up to their ideals and fight for what they believe in. While works continue to be set in the original "Universal Century" verse established in Mobile Suit Gundam, the franchise also has over a dozen Alternate Continuities that allow the franchise to delve into other genres, such as Super Robot fighting tournaments, To Be a Master modeling competitions, and Saving the World Heroic Fantasy. Lore-wise, the Gundam series  are notable for the remarkably consistent fictional technology; in UC, this is based on the original Minovsky Particle. Also notable is the presence of Newtypes, who are essentially psychics akin to "Jedi in giant robots". Newtypes, or some Suspiciously Similar Substitute, appear in most Gundam shows. Kunio Okawara created many of the iconic Humongous Mecha designs, including the RX- Gundam. However, the franchise has also had mecha designs by Hajime Katoki, Kazumi Fujita, Junya Ishigaki, Mamoru Nagano, Syd Mead and several others. The Gundam franchise is the Trope Namer for: Bright Slap  Char Clone Colony Drop Ensign Newbie "Gundamjack"  Minovsky Physics Mobile-Suit Human The Gundam franchise provides examples of the following tropes: Absent Aliens: One of the hallmarks of the show is that there are no signs of extraterrestrial life, which originally made the show stand out from the pack. The only exceptions so far are Gundam SEED mentioning a winged Space Whale fossil found on Jupiter in passing, Mobile Suit Crossbone Gundam with the microbial "Angel's Call", and Gundam , which includes Starfish Aliens in the movie. Ace Custom: Generally fielded by The Lancer or The Rival while The Hero himself usually has a Super Prototype. Aerith and Bob: There are some very strangely named characters in Gundam, there are also a scattering of people with completely mundane names. If we listed every bizarre name in every series, well... we'd be here all day. Airborne Aircraft Carrier: Most of the Cool Starships in the series qualify as these. Particularly if you count flight-capable Humongous Mecha as 'aircraft'. A Lighter Shade Of Gray: While Gundam usually goes out of its way to show that both sides of the conflict have good and bad people, it's generally still the case that one side has the moral high ground. On occasion it's not the ostensible protagonists. There are moments early in  where the protagonists  and antagonists who are nice, morally sound people who happen to be fighting against the mysterious pseudo-terrorist group that just showed up. Later on, many of this latter group end up on the same side as or working with the protagonists, and then it becomes more clear-cut. All There in the Manual: There are loads of supplements like side-stories and model kit manuals. You won't miss vital information by ignoring them... usually. Aloof Dark-Haired Girl: There's at least two in a series. She's always an important female character, usually the main character's  Love Interest, The Baroness or the Team Mom. Alternate Continuity: TV series, movie trilogies, manga, video games, and novels all retell the same stories... and all slightly differently. Alternate Universe: Universal Century: Mobile Suit Gundam: The Origin  Future Century: Mobile Fighter G Gundam  After Colony: Mobile Suit Gundam Wing  After War: After War Gundam X  Correct Century: Turn A Gundam  Cosmic Era: Mobile Suit Gundam SEED  Anno Domini: Mobile Suit Gundam   Advanced Generation: Mobile Suit Gundam AGE  Regild Century: Gundam Reconguista In G  Post Disaster: Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans  Alternative Calendar: Used for every series but Gundam , largely to avoid having to set a definitive "X years in the future" setting. Amusingly, the first few series  simply filed the serial numbers off by setting them in the year "UC XX", where XX was the year in the th century that the show was released. Mobile Suit Gundam, for example, was released in  and set in UC . Not helping things was the fact that Mobile Suit Gundam and Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam had scenes identifying the date as XX ; the general consensus is that it's note . Ambiguous Time Period: The series takes place in the future, but due to the excessive use of alternate calendars how far in the future is impossible to pinpoint. A Mech by Any Other Name: The series' signature Humongous Mecha, Mobile Suits. Anyone Can Die: The series was, after all, created by a man who was nicknamed Kill 'em All. Armored Coffins: Effective ejection systems are the exception rather than the rule in the franchise; in most instances, the pilot's best chance to survive is to pop the cockpit hatch and try to escape on foot — which is rarely an option while your mecha is exploding. Attack Drone: A staple of the franchise are attack drones controlled by a pilot's psychic abilities, rather than onboard AI. Some shows have non-psychic versions available, but that just means they're manually remote-controlled instead. Badass Beard: While several characters qualify, it's worth noting that the red "beard" protrusion is one of the defining features of the Gundam's distinctive faceplate after the V-Fin. The Battlestar: Most warships have impressive firepower in addition to their mobile suit payload... which would be nice if they ever hit anything other than mooks. Bishōnen: Having downright pretty guys  has been a hallmark for the series since about Wing. Despite most of them being hardened soldiers, which doesn't typically lend itself toward that sort of thing. Bittersweet Ending: By far the most common sort of ending to a Gundam series. Only a handful have unambigiously happy  endings. Broken Faceplate: A pilot's helmet visor being cracked or outright shattered is a good indication that they're in a lot of trouble, though it's not usually an immediate death sentence since their cockpit is also pressurized. Canon: Gundam has an unusual take on this, partly because the Western definition of "canon" in regards to fiction doesn't exist in Japan. All animated works are considered "official", while everything else is "non-official". This means that the various contradictory Alternate Continuity works  are equally "canon", while some non-animated works like Crossbone Gundam are "non-canon" despite being praised for their quality and attention to not mucking up the timeline. This makes it completely impossible to come up with any kind of "one true version" of events: see Continuity Snarl below. Centrifugal Gravity: Seen in everything from individual ships , because Gundam's tech level generally isn't advanced enough to support Artificial Gravity. Char Clone: Being the Trope Namer and Trope Maker, of course. With the exception of the OVAs, there's at least one in every series where the original Char doesn't appear... except Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ, where Char was originally intended to appear, but was scrapped when Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack was given the green light. The Coconut Effect: Consciously averted. When Tomino wrote the original series, he decided to use particle-based weapons rather than lasers specifically because lasers would be invisible, instant-hit weapons and would kill a lot of the drama of battle. Collateral Angst: When a protagonist's love interest dies , the writing focuses mainly on how the protagonist feels rather than the tragedy of said love interest's life being cut short. Colony Drop: The Trope Namer; Gundam series are extremely fond of dropping large objects onto targets from orbit. Combining Mecha: Comes and goes in phases. The original Gundam had the ability to separate and recombine; this was downplayed later. The CE timeline has this in spades, as the titular mecha combine with "packs" that seem expressly designed to ship more plastic models of the mecha. Companion Cube: Many pilots either start or come to view their mobile suits this way. Relatively minor examples will do things like ask their mecha for more power when they're going all-out, while the most extreme cases will do things like asking for advice and then behaving as though the mobile suit has given it. Compilation Movie: Gundam loves these. The television series generally get compilation movie trilogies, and even some of the OAVs have gotten compilation movies of their own. Conservation of Ninjutsu: A single enemy in a new mobile suit is usually far more dangerous than a swarm of them attacking at once — even if it's the exact same model. Continuity Snarl: By Sunrise's policy, only animated works are truly "official". However, that still makes it impossible to determine a single "real" version of events, given that the franchise's full-length TV series are usually turned into movie triologies, which are Alternate Continuity to a greater  extent... and yet, they're all equally canon in Sunrise's eyes. Convection Schmonvection: Generally averted — the bigger Wave Motion Guns can ruin your day with even a near-miss. Cool Helmet: Sort of; the Gundams' iconic V crest attached to their heads. Cool Ship: The main character usually has a ship to haul his Cool Mecha around. Corporal Punishment: The main character usually ends up on the wrong end of a punitive beatdown at least once, and that's not even counting the therapeutic beatdowns he's also likely to receive. Cosmetically Advanced Prequel: New works set in early time periods  than the original shows set in that era. Crapsack World: The various Gundam settings are usually not pleasant places to live, often involving mass murder on the scale of millions or billions of people at a time, and the risk of humanity driving itself entirely to extinction. The only good news is that the protagonists are usually able to prevent complete disaster. Curb-Stomp Battle: Gundams tend to be an instigator of many of these. They're made from a stronger material than other mobile suits, and their pilots are exceptionally skilled, so they often mop the floor on the battlefield. Cyber Cyclops: The "bad guy" mobile suits tend to have a single, glowing camera; they're typically referred to as "mono-eyes". Dark and Troubled Past: Usually the main character, when they're the Overt Agent type that start out as an experienced Ace Pilot already. The Ordinary High School Students tend to have dark and troubled presents instead. Death Flag: The chances of a named character dying within an episode increase exponentially the moment they decide to tell someone else their backstory. That character usually has ten minutes of the episode to live till they die. It happens so much in many series of the franchise that fans are ready to expect the worst once flashbacks ensue. Deconstruction: This series is one of the earliest known examples of removing the "super" from the Super Robot genre, transforming the Humongous Mecha into a glorified tank. Doomed Hometown: The main character's hometown, frequently a space colony, is usually wrecked early in the series. Sometimes directly leads to Falling into the Cockpit. Downer Ending: Less common than the Bittersweet Ending, but more common than the Happy Ending. See Zeta Gundam and Mobile Suit Gundam : Stardust Memory. Dual Wielding: Ever since the original series, the classic melee loadout for a Gundam has been a pair of beam sabers, and if there's a variation from this formula, it's usually because the suit in question is fitted with even more blades as well. Energy Weapons: Frickin' Laser Beams, Wave Motion Guns, Laser Blades, and everything in between. Everything's Better with Princesses: Gundam X and Mobile Suit Gundam AGE are the only TV series that are totally devoid of a princess  in a major and/or supporting role. And it's not uncommon for said character to be the love interest for a major character, eithernote . Evolutionary Levels: Used, subverted, and played with. Newtypes from the UC timeline are initially presented as this, but they ultimately don't seem to have much effect on the world beyond a handful of ridiculously skilled Ace Pilots. Gundam X has an ending that explicitly states Newtypes are nothing of the sort, though since it's an alternate universe it's still an open question for the UC timeline. The CE timeline's Coordinators are a mixed bag — some of them consider themselves this, but many do not. Gundam 's Innovators are the concept played completely straight. The X-Rounders of Mobile Suit Gundam AGE are still on the fence; on the one hand, both sides are trying to cultivate them, but one of the series' most powerful considers them to be an evolutionary throwback rather than advancement. Expanded Universe: Sunrise's policy divided non-animate works in two categories. If the work doesn't contradict with official animate "white" works, then it's "gray", somewhat acceptable add-on to the timeline . Expy: To say the franchise is addicted to this trope is an understatement. There's a Char in every single series. Falling into the Cockpit: A popular way to select new crack Gundam pilots. There are some notable subversions and aversions, most notably in some of the OVAs and AUs. The Federation: The Earth government is usually one. Fighter-Launching Sequence: Pretty much everyone announces their name and which mecha they're using before launching from the Cool Ship. Five-Man Band: The Universal Century was slightly more dynamic, but it came into full swing in Mobile Fighter G Gundam and Mobile Suit Gundam Wing. The Force Is Strong with This One: Newtypes and such can often sense each other. Frozen Face: Mobile suits, being mecha, don't really have any means for showing expressions. That said, the shows usually manages to convey emotions through them regardless, with visual tricks like camera angles and lighting, plus creative use of the one feature that does change: their Glowing Mechanical Eyes. Fricking Laser Beams: A staple of the franchise, though the specifics of how they work varies from series to series. Gatling Good: The head gatlings, another iconic weapon for Gundam-type suits. Mostly used for dealing with small, fast threats like planes and missiles. Get Ahold Of Yourself Man: Bright Noa, the Team Dad of the UC timeline, is the king of this trope. So much so that it was originally called the Bright Slap. Used in several other timelines as well. Giant Robot Hands Save Lives: Usually played straight. Glowing Mechanical Eyes: Mobile suit cameras  always glow when activated. Grand Theft Prototype: Previous Trope Namer. Highly advanced Gundams featuring experimental technology and extremely high combat performance get stolen with alarming regularity in the franchise. Grey and Gray Morality: Gundam is notable for rarely portraying either side of a conflict as faceless, mindless evildoers — there are good people and bad people on all sides of a conflict. That said, the protagonists' faction will usually be A Lighter Shade of Grey. Heroes Prefer Swords: Whilst their enemies often get more exotic melee weapons, the hero's suit will have a beam sabre or two. Heroic Sacrifice: From both throwaway and major characters; a side effect of Anyone Can Die. Hover Skates: Mecha can often move this way, even if they can't out-and-out fly with their thrusters. Some mecha are explicitly designed for it, most notably the Dom from various Universal Century works. Humongous Mecha: Obviously. A Mech by Any Other Name: They're called "mobile suits" in general, though different timelines have variations like "mobile fighters", "mobile dolls", and "mobile bits". Non-humanoid versions are usually called "mobile armors". Idiosyncratic Episode Naming: Not individual episodes, but almost all of the Gundam TV series . Idiosyncratic Mecha Storage: Because they generally operate in -G, the Zeon space colonists do not store their mobile suits standing upright on racks like their Earth-based Federation rivals and instead have them lying down, back-to-back, or strewn about all over the hanger because there is less of a concept of "up" without gravity. Info Dump: Happens in some spots, e.g. the introduction of the Specials in Mobile Suit Gundam Wing. Latex Space Suit: For use by both males and females, though only pilots; other crew get bulkier, more conventional space suits. Long Runner: The first series premiered in  and the franchise has been going strong since. Big Name Fan Burke Rukes once pointed out on his old website that if one were to watch all of Gundam from MSG to Turn A, it would take about a week, and that was without counting work, sleep, and bathroom/meal breaks. And mind you, this was after the Gundam's th anniversary in  — the franchise has expanded considerably since then. Love Across Battlelines: A staple of the series, as part of the standard Love Hurts Aesop. Love Hurts: Very, very rarely does a romance with a Gundam pilot work out for anyone. Love Triangle: Almost all series have this. Made of Indestructium: Gundams are typically made of this; in UC it's named "Gundarium" in honor of the Gundam which was the first to use itnote ; in AC it's called "Gundanium" and the Gundams are named after it; and in AD the Gundams use "GN Composite Armor", which is just normal armor reinforced with Applied Phlebotinum. The CE series put their own spin on the trope by introducing Phase-Shift Armor, which requires a constant supply of electrical power to function, placing it halfway between this and Deflector Shields. This is significant since the CE suits initially run on batteries with a very limited capacity. Made of Explodium: Frequently what mook mecha are made out of. Given an actual explanation in the UC works  are most infamous for it. Magitek: Newtype technology, designed to augment and be augmented by a pilot's Psychic Powers. Mask Power: The Rival and/or Char Clone usually wear one. Mecha-Mooks: Dozens of variants in the franchise, usually limited to two or three examples per series. The bad guys usually have one that's influenced by the original Zaku II from Mobile Suit Gundam, with the "gas mask" face and its iconic mono-eye. In fact, the word "Zaku" is even derived from "zako" which means "mook" in Japanese. Mega Corp.: Anaheim Electronics from the UC Timeline is a quintessential example. Mega Crossover: The Gundam Fighter Flash game, with over  Gundam characters from various shows. Dynasty Warriors: Gundam also features crossovers from the various universes, and the later entries in the Gundam Vs Series have gone this direction as well. Mêlée à Trois: First introduced in Zeta Gundam and used repeatedly since. It usually takes the form of two major players each battling it out for their own interests, with the smaller protagonist faction fighting in support of loftier ideals. Merchandise-Driven: Much, much more money is made on Gundam modeling kits than the anime itself. Mid-Season Upgrade: Nearly every Gundam show actually features two Gundams piloted by the main character — the one they start with, and the one they use after their original is destroyed and/or their piloting abilities have increased to the point where their older ride is holding them back. Sometimes this is a literal upgrade to the existing mecha, but just as often they switch to an entirely new model. Militaries Are Useless: In numerous Gundam series, the military units are composed of weaker "grunt" mobile suits that are largely ineffective and are destroyed in large numbers by the much more powerful Gundams and other "hero mechs", which are always piloted by the main characters  of the narrative. The "grunt" mobile suits are always piloted by characters who don't have major narrative roles, assuming they are ever seen at all. Military Brat: Numerous series have characters that are children of military personnel, though usually in a non-combat capability, like researchers or engineers. Mindlink Mates: In the UC continuity, powerful Newtypes of the opposite sex, particularly teenagers, tend to instinctively gravitate toward each other and form psychic and romantic bonds. Unlike most portrayals of lovers with psychic bonds, however, it often ends badly. Mini-Mecha: While Humongous Mecha take all spotlight, several series do include small mecha, usually doing labor work in the background. The first that appear in anime is Junior Mobile Suit from Zeta Gundam, unless you count Ball from first series as one. Minovsky Physics: Yet another Trope Namer, in the UC timeline, but implemented in every timeline to a greater or lesser extent. Moe Anthropomorphism: MS Girl is originator of the Mecha Musume. Moral Myopia: Common among the both heroic and villainous factions, though the protagonists will usually at least try to overcome this sort of thinking. Mythology Gag: While there are often indirect references to the original series in any given show, they often take this a step further by using the sound effects of the original series; this can range from the White Base's alert klaxon, to various booster/vernier sounds, to the classic "Pfeeew!" of the original Gundam's beam rifle. Novelization: All of the anime series except Gundam X has at least one. Beltochika's Children is rather amusing case; it was originally Tomino's rejected plot of Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack which, in turn, is adapted from Tomino's novel Hi-Streamer. In other word, it's novelization of The Film of the Book, with all three by same author! Nuclear Option: Notable for averting the Nuclear Weapons Taboo. The UC and CE timelines, in particular, are fond of throwing nukes around. UC generally treats them as dangerous and powerful weapons but not necessarily evil incarnate , while CE is rather less forgiving. Officially Shortened Title: Works within the Gundam universe are typically given a long-form title Mobile Suit Gundam  in most usage; eg, Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam is called Zeta Gundam, and Mobile Suit Gundam SEED is called Gundam Seed. They occasionally mix things up a bit . Phlebotinum Girl: Ubiquitous. In fact, the proposed name for the trope was "Newtype Girl". Phlebotinum-Handling Requirements: Various types of Mobile Suits can only be piloted by Newtypes. Pink Girl, Blue Boy: Oftentimes The Federation has uniforms for each gender with these matching colors. Pink Means Feminine: Which is why so many female pilots, from Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam all the way through to Mobile Suit Gundam AGE, have pink mobile suits . Point Defenseless: Is it a hero ship? If not, a whole armada's flak screen might as well be made of fireworks. Poor Communication Kills: Both used straight and subverted. Characters frequently end up fighting and killing each other unnecessarily because they aren't able to communicate well enough to realize neither side actually wants to fight. But just as often, they will establish that communication  and end up fighting and killing each other anyway because even though they don't want to fight, they still have incompatible ideals and neither side is willing to back down. Power Creep, Power Seep: In many video game crossovers, established mobile suit performance is pretty much thrown out the window. In fact, the RX- from the original series is usually not just keeping up with other units, but a powerful one due to Popularity Power. Powers Do the Fighting: A minor staple in the franchise. If a mobile suit has Attack Drones, expect them to do this once in a while. Protagonist Title: Mostly it's the main protagonist who pilots the eponymous mecha. The few exceptions are Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack . Psychic Children: About half the Gundam universes prominently feature youngsters with psychic powers of one kind or another, most of whom end up getting turned into as Child Soldiers because of them. Psychic Powers: Newtypes and their various Expies from most of the franchise's timelines. Real Robot: It invented the genre, though it's always been stuck somewhere between the Real Robot and Super Robot styles. Recurring Element: The visual style of the Gundam — especially the iconic "face" — is pretty consistent throughout the franchise. The setting in each AU also includes an "Earth vs space" aspect in almost every case. A recurring theme includes the question of when — and if — violence is an acceptable way to resolve your differences. Haro, the cute ball-shaped Robot Buddy, is a partial example, having shown up in UC, CE, and , but none of the other settings. Red Baron: It's usually the enemy Ace Pilots that get awesome nicknames . Oddly, the main character rarely gets this treatment. The Remnant: Exaggerated in the Universal Century continuity. The Principality of Zeon is defeated in the One Year War, but the various Neo Zeon factions continue to be the standard villain for most of the later UC series, with their last holdouts only falling in ; Unicorn's adversaries get bonus points for being The Remnant of another Remnant. Retcon: Between all the Alternate Continuity versions and OVAs, they're inevitable. They're usually not too bad, but exceptions  do occur. Ringworld Planet: Helped popularize the "O'Neill cylinder" design. Ring-world shaped colonies exists in Gundam Wing and in the in the case of Universal Century, in the beginning of Gundam Unicorn. Sensor Suspense: Tends to do this by having stuff suddenly appear immediately before they come under attack. The Bridge Bunnies suddenly yelling "Heat source detected!" out of the blue usually means bad things are about to happen. Series Franchise Series Mascot: Aside from the Gundams themselves, there are the Haros. Sliding Scale of Gender Inequality: Most tend to hover between "Know Your Place, Woman!" and "Men are More Equal". Female combatants are usually around, but they're less common than male ones, and tend to be less skilled and/or stuck with less powerful mecha than their male counterparts. And pretty much the only woman capable of keeping up with the  series protagonist in terms of both piloting ability and mecha strength — Haman Karn of Zeta and ZZ — is a villain. So Last Season: The Mid-Season Upgrade has been a staple since Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam, and even Mobile Suit Gundam had a limited version of it. Space Opera: A Downplayed example, with the action usually restricting itself to Earth and Earth orbit, and never expanding past the solar system. With the single exception of Gundam : A Wakening of the Trailblazer, it sticks to Absent Aliens, as well. Spell My Name with an "S": Whoo boy. Too many examples to list, but common to a greater or lesser extent in basically every series. The most infamous examples are probably the Principality  None of this is helped by the fact that Sunrise is, at this point, absolutely infamous for coming up with names that are meant to sound "foreign" and "sci-fi future" to Japanese audiences, but are often absolute nonsense that aren't informed by the zeitgeists or cultural memetics of any real-life civilization. For the Spacenoids, this can sort of work since they're meant to be very different and their own thing anyway , and when the kana interpretations for what the creators wanted the names to be end up all over the place, the result is a ton of confusion. Spiritual Antithesis: The entire franchise in general  is arguably an antithesis of what Gene Roddenberry's work in Star Trek represented. If there are strange new worlds to see in the Universal Century for instance, expect them to have a lot of the same problems we deal with on Earth. And expect humanity to bring its conflicts, bloodshed and hubris to the stars, as well as with all that's good in mankind. Spiritual Successor: Happens fairly often with AU series. To wit: Wing to G . X to the original series, sort of, being an alternate Bad Future to the One Year War. Turn A to X . SEED to the original Gundam .  Season  to Wing and Season  to Zeta. AGE to the entire Universal Century from the original through to Crossbone. Gundam Build Fighters to early G , and to the Gunpla Builders OVA series, which itself is to an obscure manga called Plamo Kyo Shiro. Reconguista in G is this to Turn-A due to the setting, the director, being set after the Universal Century, and the Gundams being non-standard in design . Iron Blooded Orphans is a send-up to X, Wing, and , with the violence and deconstruction of the genre taken Up to Eleven. Standard Sci-Fi History: Many series features Stage : Exploration and Colonization of Space. And then jump right into Stage : World War changing the world. The Universal Century subverts the standard progression. The rather idealistic founders of The Federation definitely thought they would bypass Stage  into something akin to Star Trek. Instead, the timeline is marked by multiple Stage  scenarios that by the time Victory takes place, it's just barely functional. State Sec: The franchise seems to have something of a love affair with this trope. Some notable examples include: The Titans, the main antagonists of Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam. They eventually take over the regular Federation Forces and become a de facto military dictatorship. They manage to be even more Nazi-like then their predecessors, the Principality of Zeon from Mobile Suit Gundam . The Titans are replaced following the First Neo-Zeon War with Londo Bell, which, since it is run by Bright Noa, is a far more moral example that doesn't abuse its authority. That said, it is still an autonomous military force outside the regular chain of command, with its official mission statement being to hunt down Zeon upstarts. The fact a Second Neo-Zeon War starts invites accusations of them not doing their job. This also explains why by the time Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn takes place, the Feddies are revealed to have established another Titans replacement called the ECOAS "Manhunter" unit. But while its job more or less is to do the sort of wetworks that Londo Bell would never do, a sense of duty, professionalism and a grounded awareness of being a Necessary Evil keep it from becoming just like the Titans. The A-Laws  from Mobile Suit Gundam , who are obvious expies of the Titans. They're autonomous from the regular military, with access to secret police, and under the direct command of Ribbons. Interestingly enough, the organization had different levels of trust: Those who have no idea what the A-Laws are really doing, the ruthless top brass who knew what the A-laws were doing but remained mere pawns, and the Innovades who really knew really what was going on. The Organization of the Zodiac in Mobile Suit Gundam Wing is an interesting case, zig-zagging as the series went on. While officially part of the Alliance military as a elite force, it was secretly the Romefeller Foundation's military wing. After eliminating the Alliance, OZ becomes the regular army for the Romefeller government. Phantom Pain in Mobile Suit Gundam Seed Destiny is a downplayed version - it's a special forces group used to support the radical Blue Cosmos faction. They get to use advanced  technology, has skilled personnel, and are autonomous from the regular chain of command. But despite being used to expand Blue Cosmos' and LOGOS's agendas, the group mostly uses standard Alliance uniforms and don't seem to be ideologically charged as other examples. Stealth Pun: Big Name Fan Mark Simmons observed that SNRI, the rival to Anaheim Electronics, was created shortly after Sunrise bought the rights to Gundam. Stock Footage: And plenty of it. More of a problem for some series than others , but much of the time it's a two-second clip that's only reused once, or it's just a split-second explosion to change scenes. The Smurfette Principle: Downplayed. Every series has female pilots, but they're almost always outnumbered by male ones, and , they're never the main character. Well, it is Shōnen, after all... Super Prototype: Just about anything with the word "Gundam" in its name, and a lot without it. Superweapon Surprise: In the UC timeline, and the CE that mirrors it, mobile suits are these, with the subversion that they're used to attack instead of defend. The first Gundams in both universes are this again, in that they're Bigger Stick mobile suits that catch the other side by surprise too! More typical examples also appear in most timelines, as well. Sword Fight: Only with Humongous Mecha and Laser Blades! Telepathic Spacemen: Newtypes from the Universal Century and their various equivalents. Transforming Mecha: Varies between series, with some series chock-full of such mecha, and others devoid of them. Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam springs to mind as the Gundam series with the most Transforming Mecha, which includes the title mech. Translation Convention: In Japan, the Army and Navy use the exact same ranking system, which has caused a good deal of confusion over what to use in the US dubs — for example, is Kou Uraki an Ensign or nd Lieutenant? Typically, this is handled by treating the Space Forces as a Navy, and the rare few series that focus on ground combat forces  use Army ranks. Vehicle Title: The eponymous Gundam is a Humongous Mecha, after all. The only exceptions are Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack . Villainous Valour: It's not uncommon to see highly courageous behaviour from Gundam adversaries, whether ordinary mooks or major villains. War Is Hell: A recurring theme. The War of Earthly Aggression: The most recurring theme in the series, and the one that generates most conflict overall. Warrior Therapist: The Rival tends to be one, resulting in philosophical debates during running mecha battles. Wave Motion Gun: There's always at least one, whether mounted on a suit, a ship, or a space station. Weapon Title: The eponymous Gundams are Humongous Mechas designed for warfare. Some works not named after the eponymous Gundams also count, such as Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack , Gundam Reconguista In G and Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans. With Great Power Comes Great Insanity: Most cyber newtypes and their alternate universe expies are not known for rationality or mental stability. Won the War, Lost the Peace: Happens repeatedly, where despite the antagonists being defeated, war erupts again in a few years anyway — usually to justify a sequel. The Universal Century, with the most sequels, suffers this the worst, amounting to about  years of more-or-less constant fighting spread out over five or six distinct conflicts . World Half Full: Virtually all Gundam shows take this attitude — thought the world may be in serious trouble, the protagonists can and will fight to make it a better place than it was when they started. Previous Index Next Golgo  Creator/Studio Dub  After War Gundam X Vocaloid UsefulNotes/Seiun Award  Osamu Tezuka Great Teacher Onizuka Creator/Tokyopop  .hack Guilty Crown MadmanEntertainment/Anime and Manga  Gundam : A Wakening of the Trailblazer Dragon Ball Collectible Card Game  Lyrical Nanoha Mai-HiME The Epic  Mobile Suit Gundam G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero Creator/TV Asahi  Kaitou Saint Tail The Girl Who Leapt Through Time Creator/The Ocean Group  Mobile Suit Gundam Go Shogun Mecha Show  Mobile Suit Gundam DieBuster No Dub for You  Mobile Suit Gundam ZZ G.I. Joe Military Science-Fiction  Halo The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy Fighting Game  Gundam Vs Series Getter Robo Creator/Fizz Sound Creation  Mobile Suit Gundam Dr. Slump The Kiddie Ride  Hamtaro Grand Theft Auto V Conspiracy Thriller  Mobile Fighter G Gundam Guild Wars Franchise Index  .hack Grange Hill Long-Runners  Guyver Goku: Midnight Eye Science Fiction Anime and Manga  Gunnm Grimgar of Fantasy and Ash Website/Crunchyroll  Mobile Fighter G Gundam Gun Blaze West Manga  Mobile Suit Crossbone Gundam GunBuster Heartwarming/Anime and Manga  Gundam Build Divers Mai-HiME Creator/Sunrise  Love Live! Final Fantasy XIII Trope Overdosed  Mobile Suit Gundam DieBuster Anime  Gundam Build Fighters Golgo  Military and Warfare Anime & Manga  Mobile Suit Gundam Gratuitous Space Battles Science-Fiction Video Games  Gihren’s Greed  Report Advertisement TV Tropes     Subscribe TVTROPES About TVTropes The Goals of TVTropes The Troping Code TVTropes Customs Tropes of Legend COMMUNITY Ask The Tropers Trope Launch Pad Trope Finder You Know That Show Live Blogs Reviews Forum TROPES HQ About Us Contact Us Advertising: advertising@proper.io DMCA Notice TVTropes is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike . Unported License. Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be available from thestaff@tvtropes.org. Privacy Policy 