.D. Last Seen  P.D. Operator Tekkadan Known Pilots Mikazuki Augus Equipment Standard  x Sub Arm Standard Armaments Handheld Sword Mace  x Twin Mace Optional Armaments Fixed  x Arm Rocket Launcher  x mm Gun Handheld New Long Sword Large Railgun Valkyrja Buster Sword Real World Information TV Series G-Tekketsu Mechanical Designer Naohiro Washio The ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus is the main mobile suit in the first half of the second season of Mobile Suit Gundam IRON-BLOODED ORPHANS. It is piloted by Mikazuki Augus.  Contents Design & Development As the ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos fought many battles with its pilot Mikazuki Augus, it became too damaged to be repaired.  Based on Mikazuki's combat data, the mobile suit was reconfigured as a close combat unit, and its reaction speed and mobility were also increased, with adjustments made through the Alaya-Vijnana System to deepen the link between the machine's movement and the pilot's own senses.  The suit's close combat armaments were rebuilt to better fit Mikazuki's fighting style, and handheld firearms were kept to a minimum, instead the suit uses exchangeable firearms attached to the forearms.  Armaments Sword-Mace A heavy, close combat weapon developed by Teiwaz's technicians for Barbatos Lupus, its shape and weight is designed to avoid hampering the MS' mobility. mm Gun Mounted on forearms, the gun barrel faces backward when not in use and rotates forward when in use. Close combat weapons can be held in hand while the mm Gun is equipped. Twin Mace Smaller than the usual mace, the twin maces are easier to wield. Arm Rocket Launcher Close to mid-range shooting weapons that fires .m long rockets. Close combat weapon can be held in hand while the launchers are equipped. New Long Sword A long sword forged by the MS workshop in Saisei for Barbatos Lupus' use. Not used in the anime. Large Railgun A large handheld electromagnetic launcher, its barrel slides forward when in use. Valkyrja Buster Sword Borrowed from the VRe- Helmwige Reincar, it is a large sword that exceeds the mobile suit’s height, and was designed for use against mobile armors. Equipment Sub Arm Like the original Barbatos, Barbatos Lupus has a pair of Sub Arms on its back for mounting weapons. They also contain a hidden claw each that can be used for attacking enemy units at the rear. Alaya-Vijnana System The cable connecting the pilot to the machine's Alaya-Vijnana system is lengthen and can be extended out of the cockpit. Operational History Gundam Barbatos Lupus was first deployed during the defense of a half-metal mine run by Kudelia Aina Bernstein's Admoss Company. It aided the other Tekkadan's Mobile Suits, the Shiden and Shiden Custom, in repealing the attack of the Dawn Horizon Corps' Garm Rodi forces. After forcing the enemy to withdraw, the Barbatos Lupus stopped working due to an impact received from a hard landing earlier.  Later it was deployed to fight off the Dawn Horizon Corps in space, destroying multiple Garm Rodis and eventually defeating the Hugo used by the group's leader Sandoval Reuters, leading to his capture by Mikazuki.  During the Arbrau-SAU war, it was deployed alongside Gundam Gusion Rebake Full City and some Shidens to aid Tekkadan's Earth Branch and protected McGillis during the conflict. During a later battle in the same war, it rescued a shocked and inexperienced Hush Middy from a Geirail Scharfrichter.  The Barbatos Lupus was severely damaged in the battle against Hashmal, a mobile armor from the Calamity War era. It was then sent back to Saisei for an overhaul, and was upgraded into the ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus Rex.  Before the damaged Barbatos Lupus was sent to Saisei, a group picture of Tekkadan was taken in front of it. A copy of this photo was seen years later in the house where Akatsuki and Atra Mixta live in.  Gallery CvhzYUVYAAihS Gundam Barbatos Lupus ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Gundam Barbatos Lupus close up ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Dispatching a Garm Rodi with Sword Mace ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Armed with mm Gun and holding Sword Mace ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Face close up ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Holding Sword Mace with both hands ASW-G- - Gundam Barbatos Lupus Gundam Barbatos Lupus close up  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Face close up  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Defeating a Garm Rodi with Sword Mace ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  mm Gun Attacking with mm Guns on both arms ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Charging with Twin Maces  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Charging with Twin Maces  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Fighting with Julieta's Reginlaze Gundam Barbatos Lupus with Twin Maces standing over Sandoval Reuters Standing over Sandoval Reuters' Hugo ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Fighting on earth ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Fighting on earth  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Fighting on earth  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Protecting a Shiden ASW-G- - Gundam Barbatos Lupus. Eyes glowing  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Eyes glowing  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Eyes glowing  Gundam Barbatos Lupus without Alaya-Vijnana System's safety limiter Gundam Barbatos Lupus without Alaya-Vijnana System's safety limiter ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Charging Hashmal ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  About to strike Hasmal ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Striking Hashmal's leg ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Tearing Hashmal's parts off with its hands ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Firing Rocket Gun ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Wielding Helmwige Reincar's Valkyrja Buster Sword ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Finishing Hashmal ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  Taking a direct hit to the cockpit .ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  End of battle with Hashmal  Gunpla HGIBO-GundamBarbatosLupus HGIBO / ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  - Box art gundambarbatoslupus / ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  - Box art SDEX-GundamBarbatosLupus SD Gundam EX-Standard ASW-G- Gundam Barbatos Lupus  - Box art BBSenshi-GundamBarbatosLupusDX SD Gundam BB Senshi # Gundam Barbatos Lupus  - Box art Lineart Notes & Trivia Barbatos is the th demon of the Ars Goetia. The word 'Barbatos' is derived from the latin "barbatus" which means bearded. The Ars Goetia demon is often depicted with a beard, and this is reflected on the suit via the red chin piece. "Lupus" is Latin for "wolf". With its Alaya-Vijnana System's safety limiter removed, Barbatos Lupus' eyes glows a blood red. This may pay homage to the EXAM System, where mobile suits utilizing this system will have red eyes if the system is activated. Barbatos Lupus' battle with Hashmal maybe a reference to the biblical confrontation between demons and angels. From another point of view, it could look like a regal knight combating a dangerous monster. An image similar to the sigil of the demon, Barbatos, can be seen on the console upon activation. With the same happening to the ASW-G- Gundam Bael, it can be assumed that all Gundam Frames would have sigils on their consoles upon activation. References ↑ . . . . . . HGIBO / Gundam Barbatos Lupus manual ↑ . . . . . . . . . / Gundam Barbatos Lupus manual ↑ . . . . . . . 'Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans Mechanical Works' Book ↑ . . . . . 'Mobile Suit Gundam Iron-Blooded Orphans Mechanics & World ' Book ↑ HGIBA / Option Set  box text ↑ HGIBA / Option Set  box text ↑ . . Mobile Suit Gundam IRON-BLOODED ORPHANS Episode , Hunter of Angels ↑ . . HGIBO / Hashmal manual ↑ HGIBA / Option Set  box text External links Gundam Barbatos Lupus on Mobile Suit Gundam IRON-BLOODED ORPHANS     Mobile Suit Gundam IRON-BLOODED ORPHANS Season  Mechanics  Categories:  Mobile Weapons Post Disaster Mobile Weapons  Recent Wiki Activity  Cyber Newtype  Major  •  minutes ago  Shinn Asuka  Muhammad Amir  •  hour ago  Space MS Carrier  FortressMaximus  •  hour ago  List of Gundams in the Gundam franchise  Phillip Jeffries  •  hours ago      Help us grow The Gundam Wiki! GET STARTED  Games Movies TV Explore Wikis Follow Us Overview About Careers Press Contact Wikia.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy Global Sitemap Local Sitemap Community Community Central Support Fan Contributor Program WAM Score Help Can't find a community you love? Create your own and start something epic. START A WIKI The FANDOM App Take your favorite fandoms with you and never miss a beat Advertise Media Kit Contact The Gundam Wiki is a FANDOM TV Community. Content is available under CC-BY-SA. Wrestlemania : Everything You Need to KnowTWD NeganTWD MorganTWD Hilltop~ 