BETA This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here  GAMES #GamingSales Japanese Fans Have Picked Their Favorite Gundam In A New National Poll Apr , , :am , views  Ollie Barder Contributor    Over at NHK, there has been a poll covering various aspects of the Gundam franchise and some of the early results are now in.  The poll covers four main areas for fans to vote on. The sections are anime, mecha, characters and theme songs.  While the results for the favorite anime and the top three theme songs have yet to be revealed, we do know the results for mecha, characters and the remainder of the theme songs.  For the mecha, the favorite all-time mecha from the franchise is the RX- Nu Gundam designed by Yutaka Izubuchi from the movie Char窶冱 Counterattack .  What窶冱 interesting about this is that for the favorite characters, Char Aznable was voted first whereas his rival, and the pilot of the Nu Gundam, Amuro Ray came third.   While you would think the Unicorn Gundam would get a mention, as there is a life-size statue of it in Odaiba in Tokyo, that wasn窶冲 even listed in the results.  ツゥ SOTSU 窶「 SUNRISE The RX- Nu Gundam is now the most popular Gundam in Japan according to a new poll from NHK. Art by Yoshiyuki Takani.  The original RX-- Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam also came in at tenth on the list of favorite mecha.  As this year marks the th anniversary of the movie Char窶冱 Counterattack, that may have swayed some fans on picking mecha like the Nu Gundam and the generally favorable mentions of other related characters and songs.  It窶冱 also worth point out that this is an NHK poll and thus national in scope, so we are getting some interesting and fairly comprehensive data here.  The obvious result of these selections is that I fully expect Bandai to announce a variety of new toys and model kits of the Nu Gundam over the next few months.  Considering how iconic the Nu Gundam is, the fact that we don窶冲 have a proper Perfect Grade kit or chogokin type toy of the design is strange and I only hope Bandai corrects this oversight in the near future.  In the meantime, you can play with the Nu Gundam and its more potent Hi-Nu Gundam variant in both Gundam Versus and the recently released Super Robot Wars X on PS. The final results of this poll will be posted on May  via the NHK website.  Follow me on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. I also manage Mecha Damashii and do toy reviews over at hobbylink.tv.  Read my Forbes blog here.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Ollie Barder Contributor i  Follow I cover gaming in Japan as well the pop-culture here. You can follow me on Twitter, Facebook or check out my YouTube videos. I also founded and continue to manage the mecha gaming site, Mecha Damashii. I have over a decade窶冱 worth of games industry experience, having worked... Read More Print Website Feedback News Tip Report Corrections Reprints & Permissions   Pause Unmute : / :  Share Fullscreen RELATED TOPICS Civic NationVoice: How It's On Us Gives Students The Tools To Combat Sexual Assault On Campus  Active on LinkedIn  Pinduoduo: The $.B Startup Challenging E-Commerce Giant Alibaba In China's Towns And Villages + views in the last  hours  Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart 