Neon Genesis Evangelion From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the anime. For other media, see Neon Genesis Evangelion . Neon Genesis Evangelion Title card of the anime television series 新世紀エヴァンゲリオン  Genre	Science fiction, mystery, thriller Anime television series Directed by	Hideaki Anno Produced by	Noriko Kobayashi Yutaka Sugiyama Written by	Hideaki Anno Music by	Shirō Sagisu Studio	Tatsunoko Production Gainax Licensed by AUS Madman Entertainment BI ADV Films Original network	TV Tokyo English network AU SBS TV CA Razer  NA Anime Network PH ABS-CBN US Anime Network, KTEH, Cartoon Network , Adult Swim ZA Animax Original run	October ,  – March ,  Episodes	  Related works Neon Genesis Evangelion  Neon Genesis Evangelion: Angelic Days Petit Eva: Evangelion@School Neon Genesis Evangelion: Campus Apocalypse Films Death & Rebirth  The End of Evangelion  Rebuild of Evangelion . You Are  . You Can  . You Can  Neon Genesis Evangelion  is a Japanese mecha anime television series produced by Gainax and Tatsunoko Production and directed by Hideaki Anno, and was broadcast on TV Tokyo from October  to March . The cast included Megumi Ogata as Shinji Ikari, Megumi Hayashibara as Rei Ayanami, and Yūko Miyamura as Asuka Langley Soryu. The music was composed by Shirō Sagisu.  Evangelion is set fifteen years after a worldwide cataclysm, particularly in the futuristic fortified city of Tokyo-. The protagonist is Shinji, a teenage boy who was recruited by his father to the shadowy organization Nerv to pilot a giant bio-machine mecha called an “Evangelion” into combat with alien beings called “Angels”. The series explores the experiences and emotions of Evangelion pilots and members of Nerv as they try to prevent any and all of the Angels from causing another cataclysm, and as they deal with the quest of finding out the real truth behind events and organizational moves. The series features imagery derived from Kabbalah, Christianity, and Judaism; these are combined to form a deconstructionism.  Neon Genesis Evangelion received both critical acclaim and controversy. Particularly controversial were the resultant last two episodes of the show, leading the team behind the series to animate the original intended version of the ending as the  film The End of Evangelion. Regarded as a deconstruction of the mecha genre, the original TV series led to a rebirth of the anime industry and has become a cultural icon. Film manga, home video and other products in the Evangelion franchise have achieved record sales in Japanese markets and strong sales in overseas markets, and by  the franchise’s gross revenues had reached over  billion yen.  Contents 	Plot 	Characters 	Production 	Themes 	Related media .	Music .	Films .	Manga .	Other media 	Releases 	Reception .	Awards 	Influence and legacy 	Merchandising 	Notes 	References 	Further reading 	External links .	Official websites .	Articles and information Plot See also: List of Neon Genesis Evangelion episodes In , fifteen years after a global cataclysm known as the Second Impact, teenager Shinji Ikari is summoned to the futuristic city of Tokyo- by his estranged father Gendo Ikari, director of the special paramilitary force Nerv. Shinji witnesses United Nations forces battling an Angel, one of a race of giant monstrous beings whose awakening was foretold by the Dead Sea Scrolls. Because of the Angels' near-impenetrable force-fields, Nerv's giant Evangelion bio-machines, synchronized to the nervous systems of their pilots and possessing their own force-fields, are the only weapons capable of keeping the Angels from annihilating humanity. Nerv officer Misato Katsuragi escorts Shinji into the Nerv complex beneath the city, where his father pressures him into piloting the Evangelion Unit- against the Angel. Without training, Shinji is quickly overwhelmed in the battle, causing the Evangelion to go berserk and savagely kill the Angel on its own.  Following hospitalization, Shinji moves in with Misato and settles into life in Tokyo-. In his second battle, Shinji destroys an Angel but runs away afterwards, distraught. Misato confronts Shinji and he decides to remain a pilot. The Nerv crew and Shinji must then battle and defeat the remaining  Angels in order to prevent the Third Impact, a global cataclysm that would destroy the world. Evangelion Unit- is repaired shortly afterwards. Shinji tries to befriend its pilot, the mysterious, socially isolated teenage girl Rei Ayanami. With Rei's help, Shinji defeats another Angel. They are then joined by the pilot of Evangelion Unit-, the multitalented, but insufferable teenager Asuka Langley Sōryu, who is German-Japanese-American. Together, the three of them manage to defeat several Angels.  Shinji is forced to fight an infected Evangelion Unit-, and watches its pilot, his friend and classmate Toji Suzuhara, incapacitated and presumably permanently crippled . Asuka loses her self-confidence following a defeat, and spirals into depression. This is worsened by her next fight, against an Angel which attacks her mind and forces her to relive her worst fears and hidden insecurities, resulting in a mental breakdown. In the next battle, Rei self-destructs Unit- and dies to save Shinji's life. Misato and Shinji visit the hospital where they find Rei alive but claiming she is "the third Rei". Misato forces scientist Ritsuko Akagi to reveal the dark secrets of Nerv, the Evangelion boneyard and the dummy plug system which operates using clones of Rei. These succession of events leave Shinji emotionally scarred and alienated from the rest of the characters. Kaworu Nagisa replaces the catatonic Asuka as pilot of Unit-. Kaworu, who initially befriends Shinji and gains his trust and affection, is in truth the final foretold Angel, Tabris. Kaworu fights Shinji, then realizes that he must die if humanity is to thrive and asks Shinji to kill him. Shinji hesitates but eventually kills him. He is overcome with guilt.  After the final Angel is defeated, Seele, the mysterious cabal overseeing the events of the series, triggers the "Human Instrumentality Project", a forced evolution of humanity in which the souls of all mankind are merged for benevolent purposes, believing that if unified, humanity could finally overcome the loneliness and alienation that has eternally plagued mankind. Shinji's soul grapples with the reason for his existence and reaches an epiphany that he needs others to thrive, enabling him to destroy the wall of negative emotions that torment him and reunite with the others, who congratulate him.  Characters  The cast of Neon Genesis Evangelion as depicted on the Japanese "Genesis"   laserdisc and VHS cover Main article: List of Neon Genesis Evangelion characters Hideaki Anno attempted to create characters that reflected parts of his own personality.  The withdrawn and mysterious pilot of Evangelion Unit-, Rei Ayanami, is a clone made from the salvaged remains of Yui and is plagued by a sense of negative self-worth stemming from the realization that she is an expendable asset. She at one time despised Shinji for his lack of trust in his father Gendo, with whom Rei is very close. However, after Shinji and Rei successfully defeat the Angel Ramiel, she takes a friendly liking to him. Towards the end of the series it is revealed that she is one of many clones, whose use is to replace the currently existing Rei if she is killed.  Asuka Langley Soryu is a child prodigy who pilots Evangelion Unit- and possesses a fiery temper and an overabundance of pride and self-confidence, which often gets her in trouble and difficulty, especially during battles. As a little girl, Asuka discovered the body of her mother shortly after she committed suicide, leading the child to repress her emotions and vow never to cry. Asuka and Rei are presented with their own flaws and difficulty relating to other people.  The teenaged Evangelion pilots are ordered into battle by the steely Gendo Ikari, Shinji's father and the commander of Nerv. He abandoned Shinji and recalled him only to serve as an Evangelion pilot. Gendo salvaged the remains of his dead wife's soul and body to create Rei, whom he viewed as a mere tool at his disposal to defeat the Angels. Similar to Shinji, he is somewhat asocial and is afraid of being insulted by others and often runs away from such, often committing immoralities in the process. He is depicted as relentless in his drive to win, a man who "takes drastic and extreme measures, by fair means or foul, or by hook or by crook, in order to accomplish his own purpose."  Production  Gainax studio in Koganei, Tokyo Director Hideaki Anno fell into a deep depression following completion of work on Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water  Evangelion borrowed certain scenarios and the use of introspection as a narrative device from a previous Anno project entitled Gunbuster.  The final version of the story reflects inspiration drawn from numerous other anime and fictional works.  The development of the Neon Genesis Evangelion series ran close to deadlines throughout its production run. The initial cuts of the first two episodes were screened at the second Gainax festival in July , only three months before they were aired on television.  Themes Main article: Themes of Neon Genesis Evangelion  The cross-shaped explosion caused by the destruction of the Third Angel exemplifies the use of Christian imagery in Evangelion. The Evangelion series is permeated with references to Kabbalah, Christianity and Judaism,  According to Patrick Drazen, the series contains numerous allusions to the Kojiki and the Nihongi, the Shinto vision of the primordial cosmos and the mythical lances of the Shinto deities Izanagi and Izanami.  Evangelion has been interpreted as a deeply personal expression of Hideaki Anno's own emotional struggles with depression.  Related media Music Main article: Music of Neon Genesis Evangelion Shirō Sagisu composed most of the original music for the series. The soundtracks released to high rankings on the Oricon charts, with Neon Genesis Evangelion III reaching the number one slot for highest sales in ; were also featured throughout the series. Additional classical works and original symphonic compositions were used to score later movies produced within the Neon Genesis Evangelion franchise. In total, the series' discography includes  full studio, live, compilation and soundtrack albums and six CD singles.  The series' opening theme was "A Cruel Angel's Thesis", performed by Yoko Takahashi. It ranked on two TV Asahi polls, reaching # for best anime theme songs of all time, and # for best anime theme songs of the s.  Films Main articles: Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death & Rebirth, The End of Evangelion, and Rebuild of Evangelion In May , Gainax announced an Evangelion film In July  the films were re-released as Revival of Evangelion which combined Evangelion: Death with End of Evangelion.  On  September , Gainax confirmed a new animated film series called Rebuild of Evangelion,  Manga Main article: Neon Genesis Evangelion  Ten months prior to the television broadcast of Evangelion, Anno worked with author and illustrator Yoshiyuki Sadamoto to publish a manga version of the story designed to generate popular interest in the upcoming anime series. The first installment of the manga was published in the February issue of Shōnen Ace in December  with subsequent installments produced on an irregular basis over an eighteen-year period. The final installment was published in June .  Other media See also: List of Neon Genesis Evangelion video games, Neon Genesis Evangelion: Angelic Days, Petit Eva: Evangelion@School, and Neon Genesis Evangelion: Campus Apocalypse Several video games based on the series have been developed, ranging from RPG and adventure games to mahjong and card games. The series has also spawned numerous art books and visual novels, one of which inspired the derivative manga series Angelic Days. The story has been adapted into two other manga series in addition to the original Sadamoto project: Petit Eva: Evangelion@School, a parody series which received its own original net animation serial show, and Campus Apocalypse, a character-focused story that omits the Evangelion robots. Several radio dramas have been released on CD and cassette to make the material more accessible to non-traditional audiences.  On February , , Evangelion:Another Impact, a D-rendered short directed by Shinji Aramaki, was released and streamed by Japan Animator Expo. It depicts "the story of an Evangelion's activation, rampage and howling in another world".  Releases  Cover for the Blu-Ray Box Set in Japan The original home video releases in Japan included VHS and Laserdisc sets using a release structured around "Genesis :", with each of the first  releases containing two episodes each. Each of the episodes received minor changes and Episodes - were extended with new scenes. "Genesis :" and "Genesis :" contained the original and the alternate versions of episodes  and  first presented in Neon Genesis Evangelion: The End of Evangelion.  The first Japanese DVD release was spread across seven volumes; all contained four episodes with the seventh volume containing both the original and alternate versions of episodes  and . This version was identical to the previous laserdisc and VHS release. The Movies were also released as a special set, just like before. In  and , three box sets were released to commemorate the fictional Second Impact which occurred in the year  in the series. The Second Impact Box contained the  original episodes and both movies on  DVDs - three per Box. The versions were the original broadcast and theatrical versions respectively and therefore different from the previous DVD release. In addition, the video game Girlfriend of Steel was included in the third box set.  In , the Japanese-only, nine volume "Renewal of Evangelion" DVDs were released,  The series was distributed in North America and Europe by ADV Films.  Reception Even fans of the sci-fi genre who avoid anime altogether have likely heard of Cowboy Bebop and Ghost in the Shell, which were each landmarks of both style and substance. But arguably the greatest and certainly most thematically dense of the three 's sci-fi anime masterpieces is Neon Genesis Evangelion. It has one of the most enduring worldwide cult franchises and passionate fanbases in all of geekdom ... the most celebrated cast in anime ...  poster boy/protagonist Shinji is one of the most nuanced, popular, and relatable characters in anime history. — Nick Verboon, Unreality Mag   Neon Genesis Evangelion received critical acclaim  Following the conclusion of the series' original television broadcast, the public and critical reception to Neon Genesis Evangelion was polarized,  The series has captured the attention of cultural theorists inside and outside Japan,  Awards Neon Genesis Evangelion has scored highly in numerous popularity polls. In , the series won first place in the "Best Loved Series" category of the Anime Grand Prix, a reader-polled award series published in Animage magazine.  Evangelion won the Animation Kobe award in ,  Influence and legacy Evangelion has had a significant impact on Japanese popular culture.   Two female cosplayers portraying Asuka Langley Soryu and Rei Ayanami. After the great success of the animated series, cosplay interest had spread worldwide Evangelion has influenced numerous subsequent anime series, including Serial Experiments Lain, RahXephon, Texhnolyze, Gasaraki, Boogiepop Phantom,  The design and personality traits of the character Rei Ayanami were reused for many anime characters of the late s, such as Ruri Hoshino of Nadesico, Ruriko Tsukushima ,  According to Keisuke Iwata, the global spread of Japanese animation dramatically expanded due to the popularity of Evangelion.  Merchandising In Japan, Evangelion is an enormous content and merchandise industry with hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue. Images of its biomechanical Eva robots are on everything from coffee mugs to smartphones and even airplane wraps. — Tim Hornyak, CNET   The popularity of Neon Genesis Evangelion extends to its merchandising which exceeded $ million within two years of its release.  The commercial exploitation of the series for the home video market achieved record sales and remained strong over a decade later. 