Cardcaptor Sakura From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Cardcaptor Sakura The first volume of Cardcaptor Sakura, published in Japan by Kodansha on November ,  featuring Sakura Kinomoto. カードキャプターさくら  Genre	Magical girl, romance Manga Written by	Clamp Published by	Kodansha English publisher AUS Madman Entertainment NA Dark Horse Comics Demographic	Shōjo Magazine	Nakayoshi Original run	May  – June  Volumes	  Anime television series Directed by	Morio Asaka Written by	Nanase Ohkawa Music by	Takayuki Negishi Studio	Madhouse Licensed by AUS Madman Entertainment NA NIS America Original network	NHK BS English network AU Network Ten, Toonami CA Teletoon IE RTÉ SEA Animax UK Nickelodeon, CITV US Kids WB, Toonami Original run	April ,  – March ,  Episodes	  Other Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie Cardcaptor Sakura : The Sealed Card Cardcaptor Sakura: Clear Card Cardcaptor Sakura , abbreviated as CCS and also known as Cardcaptors, is a Japanese shōjo manga series written and illustrated by the manga group Clamp. The manga was originally serialized in Nakayoshi from May  to June , and published in  tankōbon volumes by Kodansha from November  to July . The story focuses on Sakura Kinomoto, an elementary school student who discovers that she possesses magical powers after accidentally freeing a set of magical cards from the book that had been sealed in for years. She is then tasked with retrieving those cards in order to avoid an unknown catastrophe from befalling the world. A sequel by Clamp titled Cardcaptor Sakura: Clear Card focusing on Sakura in junior high school began serialization in Nakayoshi with the July  issue.  The series was adapted into a -episode anime television series by Madhouse that aired on Japan's satellite television channel NHK BS from April  to March . Additional media produced include two anime films, as well as video games, art books, picture books, and film comics. Tokyopop initially released the manga in English in North America from March  to August . After Tokyopop's license for Cardcaptor Sakura expired, Dark Horse Manga acquired the license and released the series in omnibus editions from October  to September .  Nelvana licensed the TV series and first film for North American broadcast and distribution, renaming it Cardcaptors, which first aired on Kids' WB from June  to December . All  episodes were dubbed; while other English-speaking territories received the full run, the version aired on American television was heavily edited into  episodes. Cardcaptors also aired on Cartoon Network, Teletoon and Nickelodeon. The TV series and films were sub-licensed by Geneon, which released them unedited with English subtitles. The TV series was also later released by Madman Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand.  Critics praised the manga for its creativity and described it as a quintessential shōjo manga, as well as a critical work for manga in general. The manga series was awarded the Seiun Award for Best Manga in . The anime television series was praised for transcending its target audience of young children and being enjoyable to older viewers. The artwork in the anime was also a focus of attention, described as above average for a late-s TV series, and Sakura's magic-casting scenes were complimented for being nearly unique because of the regular costume changes. The anime television series won the Animage Grand Prix award for Best Anime in . The American edit of Cardcaptors, however, was heavily panned by critics for cutting out character backgrounds essential to understanding the plot.  Contents 	Plot 	Production 	Media .	Manga .	Anime series .	Films .	Audio CDs .	Video games .	Other media 	Reception .	Manga .	Anime 	References 	Further reading 	External links Plot See also: List of Cardcaptor Sakura characters Cardcaptor Sakura takes place in the fictional Japanese city of Tomoeda which is somewhere near Tokyo. Ten-year-old Sakura Kinomoto accidentally releases a set of magical cards known as Clow Cards from a book in her basement created and named after the sorcerer Clow Reed. Each card has its own unique ability and can assume an alternate form when activated. The guardian of the cards, Cerberus, emerges from the book and chooses Sakura to retrieve the missing cards. As she finds each card, she battles its magical personification and defeats it by sealing it away. Cerberus acts as her guide, while her best friend and second cousin, Tomoyo Daidouji films her exploits and provides her with battle costumes. Sakura's older brother Toya Kinomoto watches over her, while pretending that he is unaware of what is going on.  Syaoran Li, a boy Sakura's age and descendant of Clow Reed, arrives from Hong Kong to recapture the cards himself. While initially antagonistic, he comes to respect Sakura and begins aiding her to capture the cards. Once Sakura captures all of the cards, she is tested by Yue, the cards' second guardian, to determine if she is worthy of becoming the cards' true master; Yue is also the true form of Yukito Tsukishiro, Toya's best friend. Aided by her teacher Kaho Mizuki, Sakura passes the test and becomes the new master of the Clow Cards.  Afterwards, Eriol Hiiragizawa, a transfer student from England, arrives in Tomoeda and begins causing disturbances with two guardian-like creatures, Spinel Sun and Ruby Moon. Sakura is suddenly unable to use the Clow Cards and transforms her wand, beginning the process of evolving the cards into Sakura Cards as Eriol causes strange occurrences that forces her to use and thus transform certain cards. Once all the cards have been transformed, Eriol tells Sakura that he aided her in converting the cards so they would not lose their magic powers. Syaoran later confesses his love to Sakura, who comes to realize she also loves him. Cardcaptor Sakura concludes with Syaoran returning to Hong Kong with a promise to return. Two years later, Syaoran moves back to Tomoeda permanently.  The plot of the anime series is extended, featuring  Clow Cards from the manga's original , and certain scenes are stretched and delayed, such as Cerberus' true form not being revealed until just before Yue's appearance. Sakura creates a rd card, Hope, a talent she is not shown to have in the manga. Some of the circumstances around the capturing of the cards is changed, such as Syaoran capturing several cards himself and being tested by Yue in the Final Judgment. Syaoran's cousin and fiancée Meiling Li is introduced in the anime, who positions herself as a romantic rival for Sakura later in the series and also a friend until she returns to Hong Kong. The TV series leaves the relationship between Sakura and Syaoran unresolved, but Sakura confesses her love to Syaoran at the end of the second anime film. In the OVA that bridges the stories of the original series and the Clear Card anime, Syaoran returns to Tomoeda two years later, just like in the manga.  Production Cardcaptor Sakura was first conceived shortly before the conclusion of Clamp's Magic Knight Rayearth, which was serialized in Nakayoshi.  Various other titles were suggested for the series such as Cardcaster Sakura and Card Character Sakura before Nekoi suggested Cardcaptor Sakura.  The central theme of Cardcaptor Sakura is love and human relationships. Throughout the series, many forms of love are showcased, including "sibling love, childhood crushes, unrequited love,   The artists, especially Mokona, were told by Ohkawa to use thin lines and to try to express things through curved lines as opposed to straight lines.  Media Manga See also: List of Cardcaptor Sakura chapters Cardcaptor Sakura began as a manga series written and illustrated by the manga artist group Clamp. It was serialized in the monthly shōjo  manga magazine Nakayoshi from the May  to June  issue.  Tokyopop released the volumes of Cardcaptor Sakura from March  to August .  Anime series See also: List of Cardcaptor Sakura episodes A -episode anime television series adaptation produced by the animation studio Madhouse aired in Japan on the NHK television network spread over three seasons.  Nelvana licensed Cardcaptor Sakura in North America, dubbed the series into English with Ocean Studios featuring Carly McKillip as Sakura, and released it under the name Cardcaptors. in the UK on CiTV and Nickelodeon, and in Canada on Teletoon . An alternative English dub of the series was produced by Omni Productions to air on Animax Asia and it has been shown entirely unedited and uncut making it very faithfully closer to the original Japanese version, which it broadcast on its English-language networks in Southeast Asia and South Asia.  Cardcaptors first aired in the United States on Kids' WB between June ,  and December , . The series ran for  episodes, changing the original episode order but finishing with the show's actual final episode. Rather than using the English versions of the original opening and ending themes like in Australia, the North American runs of the series used a new opening theme produced for the dub.  Pioneer Entertainment released the dubbed Cardcaptors episodes to nine VHS and DVD compilation volumes from November  to July .  Madman Entertainment licensed the original Cardcaptor Sakura episodes in its uncut form with Japanese audio and English subtitles in Australia and New Zealand,  Films Main articles: Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie and Cardcaptor Sakura Movie : The Sealed Card Madhouse produced two, -minute anime films as an extension to the anime television series. The first, Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie, was released on August , .  The second film, Cardcaptor Sakura Movie : The Sealed Card, was released in Japan on July , .  Audio CDs As a preview to the anime series, Kodansha released a tankōbon-sized CD volume titled CD Comic Cardcaptor Sakura in August  containing two character songs sung by the voice actors of Sakura and Tomoyo and drama tracks.  Nine theme song singles were released: six for the TV series and three for the films. The three opening theme song singles for the TV series are: "Catch You Catch Me" by Gumi released in April , "Tobira o Akete" by Anza released in April , and "Platinum" by Maaya Sakamoto released in October .  Six character song singles sung by the voice actors of Sakura, Toya, Cerberus, Tomoyo, Yukito and Syaoran released in June ; each single also contained a short drama track.  Video games Ten video games have been produced based on the series and released on a variety of video game and handheld consoles. They feature various genres, such as adventure and role-playing video games.  Title	Release date	Producer	Platform Cardcaptor Sakura: Itsumo Sakura-chan to Issho!  JP: May ,  Published by MTO	Game Boy Color Animetic Story Game : Cardcaptor Sakura  JP: August ,  Published and developed by Arika	PlayStation Cardcaptor Sakura: Sakura to Fushigi na Clow Cards  JP: December ,  Published by Bandai and developed by Sims	WonderSwan Cardcaptor Sakura: Tomoyo no Video Daisakusen  JP: December ,  Published by Sega and developed by Sega Rosso	Dreamcast Cardcaptor Sakura: Clow Card Magic  JP: January ,  Published and developed by Arika	PlayStation Tetris with Cardcaptor Sakura: Eternal Heart  JP: August ,  Published and developed by Arika	PlayStation Cardcaptor Sakura: Tomoe Shōgakkō Daiundōkai  JP: October ,  Published by MTO	Game Boy Color Cardcaptor Sakura: Sakura Card de Mini-Game  JP: December ,  Published and developed by TDK Core	Game Boy Advance Cardcaptor Sakura: Sakura Card-hen Sakura Card to Tomodachi  JP: April ,  Published by MTO	Game Boy Advance Cardcaptor Sakura: Sakura-chan to Asobo!  JP: December ,  Published by NHK Software	PlayStation  Other media Kodansha published three art books for the manga series and three art books from for the anime television series featuring art by character designer Kumiko Takahashi.  A fan book for the manga titled Cardcaptor Sakura Memorial Book was published on February ,  containing various illustrations from the series, as well as information on branded merchandise based on the series and interviews.  Ten volumes of a film comic sharing the same name as the manga and anime series were published from August  to November  covering the first two anime seasons, though some episodes were skipped.  In February , three Cardcaptor Sakura-themed cafes opened in Tokyo, Osaka and Sapporo. The restaurants feature decorations of artwork from the series, and serve menu items connected to Cardcaptor Sakura characters or items.  Reception Manga The Cardcaptor Sakura manga series was popular with Japanese readers, ranking among the top five sellers during its release.  In Manga: The Complete Guide, Mason Templar states that the series is not "just one of the best kids' manga in translation, it's one of the very best manga available in English, period." He praises Clamp for their creativity and shrewd business sense, in being able to create a series that "clearly has merchandising in line" and an "utterly forgettable premise" into a story that is "brimming with warmth and joy and wonder" and is "much more than the sum of its parts."  Anime The anime adaptation was popular with viewers in Japan, despite having a timeslot that normally has low viewership.  Zac Bertschy of ANN praised Cardcaptor Sakura for taking an "incredibly stale and repetitive" magical girl genre and "providing something fun, clever, beautifully animated, touching and exciting all at once;" Bertschy goes on to call the series "the best magical girl show ever produced."  The Kids' WB version of the Cardcaptors dub was panned by critics. Jake Godek of THEM Anime called it "the worst thing that has ever happened to anime that had a good Japanese name," with the dubbing being "one of the worst if not the worst dubbing done for a program." He also criticized the editing, saying that it had "demolished the plot" and noting that it cut out vital character backgrounds needed in order to understand the show.  In January , the restaurant chain Taco Bell began a month-long promotion in which four Cardcaptors toys were available in their kids' meals and the company expected to distribute up to  million of the toys during the month. 