an result in large differences in a later state, e.g. a butterfly flapping its wings in China can cause a hurricane in Texas.  Small differences in initial conditions such as those due to rounding errors in numerical computation yield widely diverging outcomes for such dynamical systems, rendering long-term prediction of their behavior impossible in general.  Chaos: When the present determines the future, but the approximate present does not approximately determine the future.  Chaotic behavior exists in many natural systems, such as weather and climate. environmental science, computer science, engineering, economics, biology, ecology, and philosophy. The theory formed the basis for such fields of study as complex dynamical systems, edge of chaos theory, and self-assembly processes.  Contents    Introduction    Chaotic dynamics . Chaos as a spontaneous breakdown of topological supersymmetry . Sensitivity to initial conditions . Topological mixing . Density of periodic orbits . Strange attractors . Minimum complexity of a chaotic system . Jerk systems    Spontaneous order     istory    Applications . Cryptography . Robotics . Biology . Other areas    See also    References    Scientific literature . Articles . Textbooks . Semitechnical and popular works    External links Introduction Chaos theory concerns deterministic systems whose behavior can in principle be predicted. Chaotic systems are predictable for a while and then 'appear' to become random.  Chaotic dynamics  The map defined by x →  x  mod  displays sensitivity to initial x positions.  ere, two series of x and y values diverge markedly over time from a tiny initial difference. Note, however, that the y coordinate is defined modulo one at each step, so the square region is actually depicting a cylinder, and the two points are closer than they look. In common usage, "chaos" means "a state of disorder".  it must be sensitive to initial conditions it must be topologically mixing it must have dense periodic orbits In some cases, the last two properties in the above have been shown to actually imply sensitivity to initial conditions. In these cases, while it is often the most practically significant property, "sensitivity to initial conditions" need not be stated in the definition.  If attention is restricted to intervals, the second property implies the other two.  Chaos as a spontaneous breakdown of topological supersymmetry Main article: Supersymmetric theory of stochastic dynamics In continuous time dynamical systems, chaos is the phenomenon of the spontaneous breakdown of topological supersymmetry which is an intrinsic property of evolution operators of all stochastic and deterministic  differential equations. This picture of dynamical chaos works not only for deterministic models but also for models with external noise, which is an important generalization from the physical point of view because in reality all dynamical systems experience influence from their stochastic environments. Within this picture, the long-range dynamical behavior associated with chaotic dynamics, e.g., the butterfly effect, is a consequence of the Goldstone's theorem in the application to the spontaneous topological supersymmetry breaking.  Sensitivity to initial conditions Main article: Butterfly effect  Lorenz equations used to generate plots for the y variable. The initial conditions for x and z were kept the same but those for y were changed between ., . and .. The values for  \beta  were ., and  respectively. As can be seen, even the slightest difference in initial values causes significant changes after about  seconds of evolution in the three cases. This is an example of sensitive dependence on initial conditions. Sensitivity to initial conditions means that each point in a chaotic system is arbitrarily closely approximated by other points with significantly different future paths, or trajectories. Thus, an arbitrarily small change, or perturbation, of the current trajectory may lead to significantly different future behavior.  Sensitivity to initial conditions is popularly known as the "butterfly effect", so-called because of the title of a paper given by Edward Lorenz in  to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Washington, D.C., entitled Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil set off a Tornado in Texas?. The flapping wing represents a small change in the initial condition of the system, which causes a chain of events leading to large-scale phenomena.  ad the butterfly not flapped its wings, the trajectory of the system might have been vastly different.  A consequence of sensitivity to initial conditions is that if we start with a limited amount of information about the system , but we can't say exactly what day will have the hottest temperature of the year.  In more mathematical terms, the Lyapunov exponent measures the sensitivity to initial conditions. Given two starting trajectories in the phase space that are infinitesimally close, with initial separation , the two trajectories end up diverging at a rate given by   where t is the time and λ is the Lyapunov exponent. The rate of separation depends on the orientation of the initial separation vector, so a whole spectrum of Lyapunov exponents exist. The number of Lyapunov exponents is equal to the number of dimensions of the phase space, though it is common to just refer to the largest one. For example, the maximal Lyapunov exponent  is most often used because it determines the overall predictability of the system. A positive MLE is usually taken as an indication that the system is chaotic.  Also, other properties relate to sensitivity of initial conditions, such as measure-theoretical mixing  and properties of a K-system.  Topological mixing  Six iterations of a set of states  otherwise.  The map defined by x →  x  mod  also displays topological mixing.  ere, the blue region is transformed by the dynamics first to the purple region, then to the pink and red regions, and eventually to a cloud of vertical lines scattered across the space. Topological mixing  means that the system evolves over time so that any given region or open set of its phase space eventually overlaps with any other given region. This mathematical concept of "mixing" corresponds to the standard intuition, and the mixing of colored dyes or fluids is an example of a chaotic system.  Topological mixing is often omitted from popular accounts of chaos, which equate chaos with only sensitivity to initial conditions.  owever, sensitive dependence on initial conditions alone does not give chaos. For example, consider the simple dynamical system produced by repeatedly doubling an initial value. This system has sensitive dependence on initial conditions everywhere, since any pair of nearby points eventually becomes widely separated.  owever, this example has no topological mixing, and therefore has no chaos. Indeed, it has extremely simple behavior: all points except  tend to positive or negative infinity.  Density of periodic orbits For a chaotic system to have dense periodic orbits means that every point in the space is approached arbitrarily closely by periodic orbits.  Sharkovskii's theorem is the basis of the Li and Yorke  proof that any continuous one-dimensional system that exhibits a regular cycle of period three will also display regular cycles of every other length, as well as completely chaotic orbits.  Strange attractors  The Lorenz attractor displays chaotic behavior. These two plots demonstrate sensitive dependence on initial conditions within the region of phase space occupied by the attractor. Some dynamical systems, like the one-dimensional logistic map defined by x →  x , are chaotic everywhere, but in many cases chaotic behavior is found only in a subset of phase space. The cases of most interest arise when the chaotic behavior takes place on an attractor, since then a large set of initial conditions leads to orbits that converge to this chaotic region.  An easy way to visualize a chaotic attractor is to start with a point in the basin of attraction of the attractor, and then simply plot its subsequent orbit. Because of the topological transitivity condition, this is likely to produce a picture of the entire final attractor, and indeed both orbits shown in the figure on the right give a picture of the general shape of the Lorenz attractor. This attractor results from a simple three-dimensional model of the Lorenz weather system. The Lorenz attractor is perhaps one of the best-known chaotic system diagrams, probably because it was not only one of the first, but it is also one of the most complex and as such gives rise to a very interesting pattern, that with a little imagination, looks like the wings of a butterfly.  Unlike fixed-point attractors and limit cycles, the attractors that arise from chaotic systems, known as strange attractors, have great detail and complexity. Strange attractors occur in both continuous dynamical systems . Other discrete dynamical systems have a repelling structure called a Julia set, which forms at the boundary between basins of attraction of fixed points. Julia sets can be thought of as strange repellers. Both strange attractors and Julia sets typically have a fractal structure, and the fractal dimension can be calculated for them.  Minimum complexity of a chaotic system  Bifurcation diagram of the logistic map x → r x . Each vertical slice shows the attractor for a specific value of r. The diagram displays period-doubling as r increases, eventually producing chaos. Discrete chaotic systems, such as the logistic map, can exhibit strange attractors whatever their dimensionality. In contrast, for continuous dynamical systems, the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem shows that a strange attractor can only arise in three or more dimensions. Finite-dimensional linear systems are never chaotic; for a dynamical system to display chaotic behavior, it must be either nonlinear or infinite-dimensional.  The Poincaré–Bendixson theorem states that a two-dimensional differential equation has very regular behavior. The Lorenz attractor discussed below is generated by a system of three differential equations such as:   where  \beta  are the system parameters. Five of the terms on the right hand side are linear, while two are quadratic; a total of seven terms. Another well-known chaotic attractor is generated by the Rössler equations, which have only one nonlinear term out of seven. Sprott showed that, at least for dissipative and conservative quadratic systems, three-dimensional quadratic systems with only three or four terms on the right-hand side cannot exhibit chaotic behavior. The reason is, simply put, that solutions to such systems are asymptotic to a two-dimensional surface and therefore solutions are well behaved.  While the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem shows that a continuous dynamical system on the Euclidean plane cannot be chaotic, two-dimensional continuous systems with non-Euclidean geometry can exhibit chaotic behavior. A theory of linear chaos is being developed in a branch of mathematical analysis known as functional analysis.  Jerk systems In physics, jerk is the third derivative of position, with respect to time. As such, differential equations of the form  ,x\right)= are sometimes called Jerk equations. It has been shown that a jerk equation, which is equivalent to a system of three first order, ordinary, non-linear differential equations, is in a certain sense the minimal setting for solutions showing chaotic behaviour. This motivates mathematical interest in jerk systems. Systems involving a fourth or higher derivative are called accordingly hyperjerk systems.  A jerk system's behavior is described by a jerk equation, and for certain jerk equations, simple electronic circuits can model solutions. These circuits are known as jerk circuits.  One of the most interesting properties of jerk circuits is the possibility of chaotic behavior. In fact, certain well-known chaotic systems, such as the Lorenz attractor and the Rössler map, are conventionally described as a system of three first-order differential equations that can combine into a single .  An example of a jerk equation with nonlinearity in the magnitude of  x is:  -|x|+=.  ere, A is an adjustable parameter. This equation has a chaotic solution for A=/ and can be implemented with the following jerk circuit; the required nonlinearity is brought about by the two diodes:  In the above circuit, all resistors are of equal value, except  /\pi RC. The output of op amp  will correspond to the x variable, the output of  corresponds to the first derivative of x and the output of  corresponds to the second derivative.  Spontaneous order Under the right conditions, chaos spontaneously evolves into a lockstep pattern. In the Kuramoto model, four conditions suffice to produce synchronization in a chaotic system. Examples include the coupled oscillation of Christiaan  uygens' pendulums, fireflies, neurons, the London Millennium Bridge resonance, and large arrays of Josephson junctions.   istory  Barnsley fern created using the chaos game. Natural forms . An early proponent of chaos theory was  enri Poincaré. In the s, while studying the three-body problem, he found that there can be orbits that are nonperiodic, and yet not forever increasing nor approaching a fixed point.  adamard was able to show that all trajectories are unstable, in that all particle trajectories diverge exponentially from one another, with a positive Lyapunov exponent.  Chaos theory began in the field of ergodic theory. Later studies, also on the topic of nonlinear differential equations, were carried out by George David Birkhoff, Although chaotic planetary motion had not been observed, experimentalists had encountered turbulence in fluid motion and nonperiodic oscillation in radio circuits without the benefit of a theory to explain what they were seeing.  Despite initial insights in the first half of the twentieth century, chaos theory became formalized as such only after mid-century, when it first became evident to some scientists that linear theory, the prevailing system theory at that time, simply could not explain the observed behavior of certain experiments like that of the logistic map. What had been attributed to measure imprecision and simple "noise" was considered by chaos theorists as a full component of the studied systems.  The main catalyst for the development of chaos theory was the electronic computer. Much of the mathematics of chaos theory involves the repeated iteration of simple mathematical formulas, which would be impractical to do by hand. Electronic computers made these repeated calculations practical, while figures and images made it possible to visualize these systems. As a graduate student in Chihiro  ayashi's laboratory at Kyoto University, Yoshisuke Ueda was experimenting with analog computers and noticed, on November , , what he called "randomly transitional phenomena". Yet his advisor did not agree with his conclusions at the time, and did not allow him to report his findings until .   Turbulence in the tip vortex from an airplane wing. Studies of the critical point beyond which a system creates turbulence were important for chaos theory, analyzed for example by the Soviet physicist Lev Landau, who developed the Landau- opf theory of turbulence. David Ruelle and Floris Takens later predicted, against Landau, that fluid turbulence could develop through a strange attractor, a main concept of chaos theory. Edward Lorenz was an early pioneer of the theory.  is interest in chaos came about accidentally through his work on weather prediction in . Lorenz's discovery, which gave its name to Lorenz attractors, showed that even detailed atmospheric modelling cannot, in general, make precise long-term weather predictions.  In , Benoit Mandelbrot found recurring patterns at every scale in data on cotton prices.  In December , the New York Academy of Sciences organized the first symposium on chaos, attended by David Ruelle, Robert May, James A. Yorke , Robert Shaw, and the meteorologist Edward Lorenz. The following year, independently Pierre Coullet and Charles Tresser with the article "Iterations d'endomorphismes et groupe de renormalisation" and Mitchell Feigenbaum with the article "Quantitative Universality for a Class of Nonlinear Transformations" described logistic maps. They notably discovered the universality in chaos, permitting the application of chaos theory to many different phenomena.  In , Albert J. Libchaber, during a symposium organized in Aspen by Pierre  ohenberg, presented his experimental observation of the bifurcation cascade that leads to chaos and turbulence in Rayleigh–Bénard convection systems.  e was awarded the Wolf Prize in Physics in  along with Mitchell J. Feigenbaum for their inspiring achievements.  In , the New York Academy of Sciences co-organized with the National Institute of Mental  ealth and the Office of Naval Research the first important conference on chaos in biology and medicine. There, Bernardo  uberman presented a mathematical model of the eye tracking disorder among schizophrenics. This led to a renewal of physiology in the s through the application of chaos theory, for example, in the study of pathological cardiac cycles.  In , Per Bak, Chao Tang and Kurt Wiesenfeld published a paper in Physical Review Letters describing for the first time self-organized criticality , considered one of the mechanisms by which complexity arises in nature.  Alongside largely lab-based approaches such as the Bak–Tang–Wiesenfeld sandpile, many other investigations have focused on large-scale natural or social systems that are known , and extensive data analysis to determine the existence and/or characteristics of natural scaling laws.  In the same year, James Gleick published Chaos: Making a New Science, which became a best-seller and introduced the general principles of chaos theory as well as its history to the broad public, though his history under-emphasized important Soviet contributions. Initially the domain of a few, isolated individuals, chaos theory progressively emerged as a transdisciplinary and institutional discipline, mainly under the name of nonlinear systems analysis. Alluding to Thomas Kuhn's concept of a paradigm shift exposed in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions  claimed that this new theory was an example of such a shift, a thesis upheld by Gleick.  The availability of cheaper, more powerful computers broadens the applicability of chaos theory. Currently, chaos theory remains an active area of research, social systems, population modeling, biology, meteorology, astrophysics, information theory, computational neuroscience, etc.).  Applications  A conus textile shell, similar in appearance to Rule , a cellular automaton with chaotic behaviour. Chaos theory was born from observing weather patterns, but it has become applicable to a variety of other situations. Some areas benefiting from chaos theory today are geology, mathematics, microbiology, biology, computer science, economics, and robotics. A few categories are listed below with examples, but this is by no means a comprehensive list as new applications are appearing.  Cryptography Chaos theory has been used for many years in cryptography. In the past few decades, chaos and nonlinear dynamics have been used in the design of hundreds of cryptographic primitives. These algorithms include image encryption algorithms, hash functions, secure pseudo-random number generators, stream ciphers, watermarking and steganography.  Robotics Robotics is another area that has recently benefited from chaos theory. Instead of robots acting in a trial-and-error type of refinement to interact with their environment, chaos theory has been used to build a predictive model.  Biology For over a hundred years, biologists have been keeping track of populations of different species with population models. Most models are continuous, but recently scientists have been able to implement chaotic models in certain populations.  Other areas In chemistry, predicting gas solubility is essential to manufacturing polymers, but models using particle swarm optimization  tend to converge to the wrong points. An improved version of PSO has been created by introducing chaos, which keeps the simulations from getting stuck.  Chaos theory can be applied outside of the natural sciences. By adapting a model of career counseling to include a chaotic interpretation of the relationship between employees and the job market, better suggestions can be made to people struggling with career decisions.  The red cars and blue cars take turns to move; the red ones only move upwards, and the blue ones move rightwards. Every time, all the cars of the same colour try to move one step if there is no car in front of it.  ere, the model has self-organized in a somewhat geometric pattern where there are some traffic jams and some areas where cars can move at top speed. It is possible that economic models can also be improved through an application of chaos theory, but predicting the health of an economic system and what factors influence it most is an extremely complex task.  Traffic forecasting also benefits from applications of chaos theory. Better predictions of when traffic will occur lets measures be taken to disperse it before it would have occurred. Combining chaos theory principles with a few other methods has led to a more accurate short-term prediction model .  Chaos theory can be applied in psychology. For example, in modeling group behavior in which heterogeneous members may behave as if sharing to different degrees what in Wilfred Bion's theory is a basic assumption, the group dynamics is the result of the individual dynamics of the members: each individual reproduces the group dynamics in a different scale, and the chaotic behavior of the group is reflected in each member.  Chaos theory has been applied to environmental water cycle data , such as rainfall and streamflow.~      