BETA This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here  GAMES #GamingSales 'Gundam ' Is Finally Getting A Proper Western Blu-Ray Release Next Year Nov , , :pm , views  Ollie Barder Contributor    ツゥ SOTSU 窶「 SUNRISE 'Gundam ' is already  years old this year.  Considering that this year marks the tenth anniversary of Gundam , which makes me feel very old, it is great to see that the entire series and movie will get a Western release on Blu-ray and DVD next year.  Previously, Gundam  only had a DVD release for the TV series in the West, with the movie being the only part of the saga that made it to Blu-ray.  Considering that Gundam  was the first Gundam anime to be animated and broadcast in high-definition, the fact that Western fans only got a DVD version was a bit disappointing.  Well, this injustice will be rectified next year when Right Stuff Anime will re-release the series and movie on Blu-ray.  In addition, we also have Gundam Unicorn and Gundam AGE getting similar Blu-ray and DVD releases, so it seems that Nozomi Entertainment is still on its quest to release all the Gundam it can outside of Japan.   My hope here is that Nozomi Entertainment also turns its attention to other Blu-ray anime releases from Sunrise. After all, series such as Panzer World Galient, Aura Battler Dunbine, Blue Comet SPT Layzner and The King of Braves GaoGaiGar have all been given amazing Blu-ray releases in Japan.  These are all classic anime series and deserve their chance in the West and considering that they have Blu-ray versions available, to not release them outside of Japan would be a huge shame.  At the very least though, Gundam  is on its way finally and that fills me with no small amount of joy. From its wonderful animation to its gorgeous Kenji Kawai score, not to mention its gripping narrative and overt Layzner references throughout, Gundam  is one of the best alternate timeline Gundam shows ever made and it is about time we had it properly released on Blu-ray.  Follow me on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. I also manage Mecha Damashii and do toy reviews over at hobbylink.tv.  Read my Forbes blog here.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Ollie Barder Contributor i  Follow I cover gaming in Japan as well the pop-culture here. You can follow me on Twitter, Facebook or check out my YouTube videos. I also founded and continue to manage the mecha gaming site, Mecha Damashii. I have over a decade窶冱 worth of games industry experience, having worked... Read More Print Website Feedback News Tip Report Corrections Reprints & Permissions   Pause Unmute : / :  Share Fullscreen RELATED TOPICS  Active on Twitter  Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart + views in the last  hours  Why Google, IBM & Microsoft Are All Expanding In Taiwan This Year + views in the last  hours  China And Vietnam Explored Almost A Decade Together For Oil. What Went Wrong?     ASIA #GettingBuzz Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart Apr , , :am , views  Leeza Mangaldas Contributor ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Leeza Mangaldas Contributor i  Follow I'm a TV presenter and writer based in Mumbai. I write about India. Print Website Feedback News Tip Report Corrections Reprints & Permissions RELATED TOPICS + views in the last  hours  Why Google, IBM & Microsoft Are All Expanding In Taiwan This Year + views in the last  hours  China And Vietnam Explored Almost A Decade Together For Oil. What Went Wrong? + views in the last  hours  iPad  Review: Why Would Anyone Need The iPad Pro . Now? 