Riku Mikami, Natsumi Fujwara as Yukio Hidaka, Nene Hieda as Yashiro Momoka, Haruka Terui as Sera, Jun Kasama as Kyoya Kujo, and Sho Hayami as Rommel. The series will be directed by Shinya Watada, with Noboru Kimura composing for the series and Shuri Toida handling the character designs.  One Mobile Suit Gundam fan even calculated what kind of power the mechas would yield in real life. Taking one of the most oft-ignored mechs in the series, that fans wouldn't consider too powerful, they calculated an incredible range that would surely do damage in the real world.   Premium Bandai is currently taking pre-orders on their site for the two pillows representing a cute version of Char's Masai cruiser and the SCV- White Base. With orders being taking until they sell out, they'll start shipping out in March.  Financial magazine Weekly Toyo Keizai commissioned the  year old character designer for Mobile Suit Gundam, Yoshikazu Yasuhiko, to draw their cover for their  financial forecast issue.The cover depicts President of the United States Donald Trump partying for the new year with Russian President Vladimir Putin, Chinese President Xi Jinping, and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. The most damning, however, is the depiction of North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un, who sits on top of a nuclear missile in-between all of them.   COMMENTS Not familiar with Gundam? You may want to give its latest anime a spin. Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans, the series is set more than  years after the Calamity War first seen in the original Mobile Suit Gundam anime. With the Earth Sphere falling into anarchy, the world has given way to bandits and rebels.  Iron-Blooded Orphans focuses on a young boy named Mikazuki Augus as he works for a security company, and his is used as cannon fodder during an ambush. Augus, along with his friend Orga Itsuka, take the chance to revolt against their demeaning employers - and the determined boy changes his fate when he begins piloting an abandoned mobile suit known as Gundam Barbatos.~ 