mination of a three-series-long narrative, it was actually the first Gundam anime I ever saw and it made a huge impression on me. It showed me how involved and complex the story and characters were in Gundam, that it was unlike anything else.   When I spoke with Yoshiyuki Tomino about his work on Gundam, he talked in part about the theme of Newtypes in the story, something that is a core part of Char窶冱 Counterattack.  ツゥ SOTSU 窶「 SUNRISE The cover artwork for the original laserdisc release of 'Gundam: Char's Counterattack' as penned by Yoshiyuki Takani.  While I was working on Mobile Suit Gundam over the course of  years I began to think about how human beings might improve and evolve. Unfortunately, I was unable to properly get this idea into the original Mobile Suit Gundam. In that, I was unable to present an adequate form of a more evolved human. Speaking in modern terms, the first cognitive revolution occurred when Homo sapiens crossed the ocean, and I wanted to depict the second cognitive revolution by going into space.  In terms of describing this idea in subsequent Gundam series, I wasn窶冲 able to do that either. In terms of the later Gundam stories I worked on, trying to show how a human might evolve into something better, it would be usually described as something like a god but that's not something I intended. Newtypes are just evolved beings and not gods. I don't think that the later Gundam series were able to adequately show what that might be.  That said, about  years ago I tried to get at the core of this Newtype idea and it resulted in a type of human that could comprehend someone else without any misunderstanding. However, I couldn't really make a compelling story out of it. In short, it didn't become a story. So I couldn't do it and I've been stagnating since and I've recently caught a cold as well .  While Tomino may feel he didn窶冲 quite manage to encapsulate what a Newtype might be, the impact of his work is still very much with us when a movie such as Char窶冱 Counterattack is so widely remembered and highly regarded.  From the fantastic mecha design by Yutaka Izubuchi, the ethereal character design by Hiroyuki Kitazume and the sweeping musical score by Shigeaki Saegusa, Char窶冱 Counterattack had some serious production value behind it. Even the then mighty Gainax were involved in the movie窶冱 production.  Thirty years later it窶冱 difficult to quantify this film窶冱 cultural impact, suffice to say that is both far-reaching and substantial.  From the manga retelling of Beltorchika窶冱 Children to the continued inclusion of mecha from Char窶冱 Counterattack in the Super Robot Wars games, with the upcoming Super Robot Wars X out at the end of this month being no exception, this movie has stood the test of time in a unique way.  Gundam: Char窶冱 Counterattack is available on Blu-ray and DVD via Right Stuf Anime and I have also reviewed this release if you are at all curious.  Follow me on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. I also manage Mecha Damashii and do toy reviews over at hobbylink.tv.  Read my Forbes blog here.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Ollie Barder Contributor i  Follow  I cover gaming in Japan as well the pop-culture here. You can follow me on Twitter, Facebook or check out my YouTube videos. I also founded and continue to manage the mecha gaming site, Mecha Damashii. I have over a decade窶冱 worth of games industry experience, having worked... Read More  Print  Website Feedback  News Tip  Report Corrections  Reprints & Permissions   Play  Unmute  :  /  :  Share CaptionsFullscreen RELATED TOPICS  Active on Twitter  Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart + views in the last  hours  Why Google, IBM & Microsoft Are All Expanding In Taiwan This Year + views in the last  hours  China And Vietnam Explored Almost A Decade Together For Oil. What Went Wrong?       ASIA #GettingBuzz Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart Apr , , :am , views  Leeza Mangaldas Contributor TWEET THIS For Walmart or Amazon to acquire a majority stake in Flipkart is to acquire a major slice of this market Flipkart stands to not only add financial heft but also to strengthen its supply chain and enhance efficiency in procurement and product assortment.     BENGALURU, INDIA - OCTOBER : Outside view of Flipkart office in Bengaluru, India.   Last week, India窶冱 business news publications were abuzz with speculation around a possible acquisition of a majority stake in Indian e-commerce giant Flipkart by either Amazon or Walmart.  While rumors of the possibility of such deals have appeared repeatedly over the last two years, it is believed that Walmart and Amazon are both currently engaged in advanced talks with Flipkart. According to the latest reports, Walmart has already completed due diligence procedures and is hoping to acquire a stake of % or more in Flipkart, with an investment of $- billion; a similar deal with Amazon would be likely to face close scrutiny from the Competition Commission of India because together, Flipkart and Amazon would totally monopolize India窶冱 e-commerce sector.  Why is this deal so important?  Founded in  by two former Amazon employees, Sachin Bansal and Binny Bansal  as an online seller of books, Flipkart was essentially envisioned as India窶冱 Amazon before Amazon came to India. It has raised well over $ billion in the decade since its inception, including an investment of around $. billion from SoftBank Vision Fund, and has emerged as India窶冱 most valuable internet startup.   Because India is a huge yet relatively untapped market projected to grow rapidly, it is an extremely important market for any business aspiring to expand its global footprint.  Flipkart was India窶冱 biggest e-commerce company until Amazon entered India, giving Flipkart some intense competition. While Flipkart supposedly continues to be in the lead, estimates of the company窶冱 market share are hotly contested. But the fact remains that it is a humongous player in India窶冱 online retail market.  For Walmart or Amazon to acquire a majority stake in Flipkart is to acquire a major slice of this market , which is expected to grow at a CAGR of % for gross merchandise value to $ billion by .  India is also a crucial battleground for both U.S. rivals against other major international competitors like Alibaba.   An employee scans the bar code of a package at the Amazon.com Inc. fulfillment center in Hyderabad, India. Photographer: Dhiraj Singh/Bloomberg  What Amazon and Walmart have to gain from a potential takeover  If a deal goes through between either Walmart or Amazon, Flipkart stands to not only add financial heft but also to strengthen its supply chain and enhance efficiency in procurement and product assortment.  Amazon entered India in -, and has committed at least $ billion to grabbing a foothold in India窶冱 e-commerce landscape since. If Amazon acquires Flipkart, it is estimated that they would together control close to % of India窶冱 online retail market. Thus by joining hands with Amazon, Flipkart would virtually double its market share, becoming India窶冱 undisputed number one online retail platform, and a force to reckon with globally.  Walmart on the other hand, has been eyeing India窶冱 retail sector for years, but the country窶冱 existing foreign direct investment policy has prevented the U.S.-based firm from being able to have a significant presence in the country. While it does operate close to  Best Price wholesale stores, Walmart has had to stay away from direct retail, and has avoided joining hands with any other Indian retailer since its messy partnership with Bharti Enterprises ended in .   A customer pays at a check-out counter at a Bharti Walmart Pvt. Ltd. Best Price Modern Wholesale store in Zirakpur, on the outskirts of Chandigarh, Punjab, India,  Photographer: Sanjit Das/Bloomberg  And while Walmart remains the largest retailer in the world, it has been slow in the race to dominate the online retail market. To make up for lost time, over the last few years it has been more aggressive in expanding its presence in the U.S. to take on Amazon, buying Jet.com for $ billion in .  Initial talks between Walmart and Flipkart were also held in . Flipkart was starting to lose significant market share to Amazon at this time, as Amazon had embarked on an unprecedented investment spree in India. Those initial talks were inconclusive, but clearly Flipkart has continued to be on Walmart窶冱 horizon in the months since.  The acquisition of a majority stake in Flipkart would be Walmart窶冱 biggest investment in the online space yet, and a major step up in boosting its presence in India and globally.  With Walmart, Flipkart would bolster its ability to compete against Amazon both online and via offline retail channels, and the battle between Flipkart and Amazon for the number one spot in India would be unlikely to conclude any time soon. It would essentially become a Walmart vs Amazon battle, much like it is in the U.S. currently.  Finally, a deal of this scale with either party would also reinforce confidence in India窶冱 long-term consumer internet potential and be likely to inspire further strategic investments by other international players as well.  You can follow me on Twitter, Instagram or Facebook and find more of my work at leezamangaldas.com.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Leeza Mangaldas Contributor i  Follow  I'm a TV presenter and writer based in Mumbai. I write about India.  Print  Website Feedback  News Tip  Report Corrections  Reprints & Permissions   Play Video  RELATED TOPICS  + views in the last  hours  Why Google, IBM & Microsoft Are All Expanding In Taiwan This Year + views in the last  hours  China And Vietnam Explored Almost A Decade Together For Oil. What Went Wrong? + views in the last  hours  iPad  Review: Why Would Anyone Need The iPad Pro . Now?     ~ 