Measure  From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    Not to be confused with Metric . For the coalgebraic concept, see measuring coalgebra.  Informally, a measure has the property of being monotone in the sense that if A is a subset of B, the measure of A is less than or equal to the measure of B. Furthermore, the measure of the empty set is required to be . In mathematical analysis, a measure on a set is a systematic way to assign a number to each suitable subset of that set, intuitively interpreted as its size. In this sense, a measure is a generalization of the concepts of length, area, and volume. A particularly important example is the Lebesgue measure on a Euclidean space, which assigns the conventional length, area, and volume of Euclidean geometry to suitable subsets of the n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn. For instance, the Lebesgue measure of the interval  in the real numbers is its length in the everyday sense of the word – specifically, .  Technically, a measure is a function that assigns a non-negative real number or +∞ to  number of 'smaller' disjoint subsets, is the sum of the measures of the "smaller" subsets. In general, if one wants to associate a consistent size to each subset of a given set while satisfying the other axioms of a measure, one only finds trivial examples like the counting measure. This problem was resolved by defining measure only on a sub-collection of all subsets; the so-called measurable subsets, which are required to form a σ-algebra. This means that countable unions, countable intersections and complements of measurable subsets are measurable. Non-measurable sets in a Euclidean space, on which the Lebesgue measure cannot be defined consistently, are necessarily complicated in the sense of being badly mixed up with their complement. Indeed, their existence is a non-trivial consequence of the axiom of choice.  Measure theory was developed in successive stages during the late th and early th centuries by Émile Borel,  enri Lebesgue, Johann Radon, and Maurice Fréchet, among others. The main applications of measures are in the foundations of the Lebesgue integral, in Andrey Kolmogorov's axiomatisation of probability theory and in ergodic theory. In integration theory, specifying a measure allows one to define integrals on spaces more general than subsets of Euclidean space; moreover, the integral with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Euclidean spaces is more general and has a richer theory than its predecessor, the Riemann integral. Probability theory considers measures that assign to the whole set the size , and considers measurable subsets to be events whose probability is given by the measure. Ergodic theory considers measures that are invariant under, or arise naturally from, a dynamical system.  Contents 	Definition 	Examples 	Basic properties .	Monotonicity .	Measure of countable unions and intersections ..	Subadditivity ..	Continuity from below ..	Continuity from above 	Sigma-finite measures 	s-finite measures 	Completeness 	Additivity 	Non-measurable sets 	Generalizations 	See also 	References 	Bibliography 	External links Definition  Countable additivity of a measure μ: The measure of a countable disjoint union is the same as the sum of all measures of each subset. Let X be a set and Σ a σ-algebra over X. A function μ from Σ to the extended real number line is called a measure if it satisfies the following properties:  Non-negativity: For all E in Σ: μ ≥ . Null empty set:  \mu =. Countable additivity : For all countable collections  of pairwise disjoint sets in Σ: ) One may require that at least one set E has finite measure. Then the empty set automatically has measure zero because of countable additivity, because   which implies =.  If only the second and third conditions of the definition of measure above are met, and μ takes on at most one of the values ±∞, then μ is called a signed measure.  The pair  is called a measurable space, the members of Σ are called measurable sets. If . In this setup, the composition of measurable functions is measurable, making the measurable spaces and measurable functions a category, with the measurable spaces as objects and the set of measurable functions as arrows. See also Measurable function#Term usage variations about another setup.  A triple  = . A probability space is a measure space with a probability measure.  For measure spaces that are also topological spaces various compatibility conditions can be placed for the measure and the topology. Most measures met in practice in analysis  and a number of other sources. For more details, see the article on Radon measures.  Examples Some important measures are listed here.  The counting measure is defined by μ = number of elements in S. The Lebesgue measure on R is a complete translation-invariant measure on a σ-algebra containing the intervals in R such that μ = ; and every other measure with these properties extends Lebesgue measure. Circular angle measure is invariant under rotation, and hyperbolic angle measure is invariant under squeeze mapping. The  aar measure for a locally compact topological group is a generalization of the Lebesgue measure  and has similar uniqueness properties. The  ausdorff measure is a generalization of the Lebesgue measure to sets with non-integer dimension, in particular, fractal sets. Every probability space gives rise to a measure which takes the value  on the whole space . Such a measure is called a probability measure. See probability axioms. The Dirac measure δa , where χS is the indicator function of S. The measure of a set is  if it contains the point a and  otherwise. Other 'named' measures used in various theories include: Borel measure, Jordan measure, ergodic measure, Euler measure, Gaussian measure, Baire measure, Radon measure, Young measure, and Loeb measure.  In physics an example of a measure is spatial distribution of mass  or not. Negative values lead to signed measures, see "generalizations" below.  Liouville measure, known also as the natural volume form on a symplectic manifold, is useful in classical statistical and  amiltonian mechanics. Gibbs measure is widely used in statistical mechanics, often under the name canonical ensemble. Basic properties Let μ be a measure.  Monotonicity If E and E are measurable sets with E ⊆ E then  ). Measure of countable unions and intersections Subadditivity For any countable sequence E, E, E, ... of  measurable sets En in Σ:  ). Continuity from below If E, E, E, ... are measurable sets and En is a subset of En +  for all n, then the union of the sets En is measurable, and  ). Continuity from above If E, E, E, ... are measurable sets and for all n, En +  ⊂ En, then the intersection of the sets En is measurable; furthermore, if at least one of the En has finite measure, then  ). This property is false without the assumption that at least one of the En has finite measure. For instance, for each n ∈ N, let En = [n, ∞) ⊂ R, which all have infinite Lebesgue measure, but the intersection is empty.  Sigma-finite measures Main article: Sigma-finite measure A measure space . Nonzero finite measures are analogous to probability measures in the sense that any finite measure μ is proportional to the probability measure \mu . A measure μ is called σ-finite if X can be decomposed into a countable union of measurable sets of finite measure. Analogously, a set in a measure space is said to have a σ-finite measure if it is a countable union of sets with finite measure.  For example, the real numbers with the standard Lebesgue measure are σ-finite but not finite. Consider the closed intervals  for all integers k; there are countably many such intervals, each has measure , and their union is the entire real line. Alternatively, consider the real numbers with the counting measure, which assigns to each finite set of reals the number of points in the set. This measure space is not σ-finite, because every set with finite measure contains only finitely many points, and it would take uncountably many such sets to cover the entire real line. The σ-finite measure spaces have some very convenient properties; σ-finiteness can be compared in this respect to the Lindelöf property of topological spaces. They can be also thought of as a vague generalization of the idea that a measure space may have 'uncountable measure'.    s-finite measures Main article: s-finite measure A measure is said to be s-finite if it is a countable sum of bounded measures. S-finite measures are more general than sigma-finite ones and have applications in the theory of stochastic processes.  Completeness Main article: Complete measure A measurable set X is called a null set if μ = . A subset of a null set is called a negligible set. A negligible set need not be measurable, but every measurable negligible set is automatically a null set. A measure is called complete if every negligible set is measurable.  A measure can be extended to a complete one by considering the σ-algebra of subsets Y which differ by a negligible set from a measurable set X, that is, such that the symmetric difference of X and Y is contained in a null set. One defines μ.  Additivity Measures are required to be countably additive.  owever, the condition can be strengthened as follows. For any set  define:  ,J\subseteq I\right\rbrace . That is, we define the sum of the  to be the supremum of all the sums of finitely many of them.  A measure  the following hold:   \right). Note that the second condition is equivalent to the statement that the ideal of null sets is  \kappa -complete.  Non-measurable sets Main article: Non-measurable set If the axiom of choice is assumed to be true, it can be proved that not all subsets of Euclidean space are Lebesgue measurable; examples of such sets include the Vitali set, and the non-measurable sets postulated by the  ausdorff paradox and the Banach–Tarski paradox.  Generalizations For certain purposes, it is useful to have a "measure" whose values are not restricted to the non-negative reals or infinity. For instance, a countably additive set function with values in the  real numbers is called a signed measure, while such a function with values in the complex numbers is called a complex measure. Measures that take values in Banach spaces have been studied extensively. A measure that takes values in the set of self-adjoint projections on a  ilbert space is called a projection-valued measure; these are used in functional analysis for the spectral theorem. When it is necessary to distinguish the usual measures which take non-negative values from generalizations, the term positive measure is used. Positive measures are closed under conical combination but not general linear combination, while signed measures are the linear closure of positive measures.  Another generalization is the finitely additive measure, which are sometimes called contents. This is the same as a measure except that instead of requiring countable additivity we require only finite additivity.  istorically, this definition was used first. It turns out that in general, finitely additive measures are connected with notions such as Banach limits, the dual of L∞ and the Stone–Čech compactification. All these are linked in one way or another to the axiom of choice.  A charge is a generalization in both directions: it is a finitely additive, signed measure.      