Indian classical drama From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    History of literature by era Bronze Age Ancient Egyptian Akkadian Sumerian Classical Avestan Chinese Greek Hebrew Latin Pali Prakrit Sanskrit Syriac Tamil Early Medieval Matter of Rome Matter of France Matter of Britain Armenian Byzantine Georgian Japanese Kannada Middle Persian Turkish Medieval Old Bulgarian Old English Middle English Arabic Persian Armenian Byzantine Castilian Catalan Dutch French Georgian German Bengali Indian Old Irish Italian Korean Nepal Bhasa Norse Russian Telugu Turkish Welsh Early Modern Renaissance Baroque Modern by century th th th st v t e The term Indian classical drama refers to the tradition of dramatic literature and performance in ancient India. The origin of dramatic performance in Indian subcontinent can be traced back to as early as  BCE. Buddhist philosopher Asvaghosa who composed Buddhacarita is considered to have been the first Sanskrit dramatist.  Despite its name, a classical Sanskrit drama uses both Sanskrit and Prakrit languages giving it a bilingual nature.  Kト〕idト《a in the th-th century CE, was arguably one of ancient India's greatest Sanskrit dramatists. Three famous romantic plays written by Kト〕idト《a are the Mト〕avikト“nimitram  is credited with having written three plays: the comedy Ratnavali, Priyadarsika, and the Buddhist drama Nagananda. Other famous Sanskrit dramatists include ナ喇udraka, Bhasa, and Asvaghosa. Though numerous plays written by these playwrights are still available, little is known about the authors themselves.  Contents 	Beginnings 	Theory .	Natya Shastra 	Plays .	Mricchakatika  .	Bhasa .	Kト〕idト《a .	Mudrarakshasa of Vishakhadatta .	Other major plays 	Performances 	Modern Sanskrit Plays 	See also 	References 	Sources 	Further reading 	References 	Notes Beginnings The earliest-surviving fragments of Sanskrit drama date from c. BCE.  However, although there are no surviving fragments of any drama prior to this date, it is possible that early Buddhist literature provides the earliest evidence for the existence of Indian theater. The Pali suttas , who performed dramas on a stage. It is indicated that these dramas incorporated dance, but were listed as a distinct form of performance, alongside dancing, singing, and story recitations.  Since the time of Alexander the Great, the Indian subcontinent came into direct contact with Greek culture. This has led to a scholarly debate about how much influence Ancient Greek drama had upon the development of Indian theater.  Theory Natya Shastra Main article: Natya Shastra Major source of evidence for Sanskrit theatre is A Treatise on Theatre  in an hereditary process. Its aim was both to educate and to entertain.  Under the patronage of royal courts, performers belonged to professional companies that were directed by a stage manager , who may also have acted.  The theory of rasa described in the text has been a major influence on the modern theatre of India as well as Indian cinema, particularly Bollywood.  Plays Mricchakatika  Main article: Mrichakatika One of the earliest known Sanskrit plays, this play was composed by ナ嗽draka in the nd century BC. Rife with romance, sex, royal intrigue and comedy, the juicy plot of the play has numerous twists and turns. The main story is about a young man named Charudatta, and his love for Vasantasena, a rich courtesan or nagarvadhu. The love affair is complicated by a royal courtier, who is also attracted to Vasantasena. The plot is further complicated by thieves and mistaken identities, and thus making it a greatly hilarious and entertaining play. It invited widespread admiration when staged in New York in . The play was made into a  Hindi movie Utsav, directed by Girish Karnad. The Indian play depicted in the  film Moulin Rouge! may have been based on The Little Clay Cart.  Bhasa Main article: Bhト《a The plays written by Bhト《a were only known to historians through the references of later writers, the manuscripts themselves being lost. Manuscripts of  plays written by him were discovered in an old library in Thiruvananthapuram  in  by the scholar Ganapati Sastri. A th play was later discovered and attributed to Bhト《a, but its authorship is disputed.  Bhasa's most famous plays are Svapna Vasavadattam . Some other plays being Pratimanト》aka, Abhishekanト》aka, Bト〕acharita, Dナォtavト〔ya, Karnabhト〉a, Dナォtaghatotkacha, Chト〉udatta, Madhyamavyト【oga and ナェrubha盪⑽a.  Karnabhara is a critically acclaimed play and it is being subjected to lot of experimentation by the modern theatre groups in India.  Bhasa is considered to be one of the best Sanskrit playwrights, second only to Kalidasa. He is earlier than Kalidasa, and is dated to the rd or th century CE.  Kト〕idト《a Main article: Kト〕idト《a Kト〕idト《a . The last named play is considered to be greatest play in Sanskrit. More than a millennium later, it would so powerfully impress the famous German writer Goethe that he would write:  "Wouldst thou the young year's blossoms and the fruits of its decline And all by which the soul is charmed, enraptured, feasted, fed, Wouldst thou the earth and heaven itself in one sole name combine? I name thee, O Shakuntala! and all at once is said. " Kト〕idト《a also wrote two large epic poems, Raghuva盪η嫗 , another 'perfect' work.  Kト〕idト《a's writing is characterized by the usage of simple but beautiful Sanskrit, and by his extensive use of similes. His similes have earned him the saying, Upama Kalidasasya . The full ナ嬪oka reads: "upamトKālidāsasya, Bhāraver arthagauravam | Daṇḍinah padalālityam, Māghe santi trayoguṇah ||"  Mudrarakshasa of Vishakhadatta Amongst Sanskrit plays, the historical play Mudrarakshasa is unique because it contains political intrigue and is full of life, action and sustained interest. The time period of composition is prior to  C.E. In the play, Chandragupta Maurya is ruling from Pataliputra, having deposed the last of the Nanda kings. Rakshasa the minister of Nanda, attempts to avenge his late master. Chanakya, the minister of Chandragupta succeeds in winning over Rakshasa to his master's side.  Other major plays Other great plays include Ratnavali, Nagananda and Priyadarsika by Sri Harsha , Mahendravikramavarman's Mattavilasa Prahasana, Shaktibhadra's Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi, Kulasekhara’s Subhadradhananjaya and Tapatisamvarana, Neelakantha's Kalyana Saugandhika and Sri Krishna Charita.   King Udayana in Bhasa's Swapnavasavadattam Koodiyattam—the only surviving ancient Sanskrit theatre.  Performances Sanskrit plays were very popular and were staged in ancient times all over India. Now the only surviving ancient Sanskrit drama theatre is Koodiyattam, which is preserved in Kerala by the Chakyar community. This form of Sanskrit drama is thought to be at least  years old and is one of the oldest living theatrical traditions in the world. All major Sanskrit plays such as that of Bhasa, Sri Harsha, Shaktibhadra etc. are performed in Koodiyattam. Guru Nātyāchārya Vidūshakaratnam Padma Shri Māni Mādhava Chākyār choreographed and directed plays like Kalidasa's Abhijñānaśākuntala, Vikramorvaśīya and Mālavikāgnimitra; Bhasa's Swapnavāsadatta and Pancharātra for the first time in the history of Koodiyattam. He popularised Koodiyattam and rejuvenated the only surviving Sanskrit drama theatre in India.  One of the hypotheses  of the origins of the "Trivandrum plays" of Bhasa is that these  plays were adapted from their original sources and brought to Kerala for choreography in the Koodiyattam tradition.  Modern Sanskrit Plays Manmohan Acharya, a modern Sanskrit playwright has written many plays and dance dramas. Some worth-mentioning plays are Arjuna-Pratijnaa, Shrita-kamalam, Pada-pallavam, Divya-Jayadevam, Pingalaa, Mrtyuh, Sthitaprajnah, Tantra-mahasaktih, Purva-sakuntalam, Uttara-sakuntalam and Raavanah.   Famous Indian Dance Drama, Tantram  by Srjan, Script written by Vanikavi Vidyadhar Shastri wrote three Sanskrit plays viz. Purnanandam, Kalidainyam and Durbala Balam.  Prafulla Kumar Mishra has written the plays Chitrangada and Karuna.Indian classical drama From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia    History of literature by era Bronze Age Ancient Egyptian Akkadian Sumerian Classical Avestan Chinese Greek Hebrew Latin Pali Prakrit Sanskrit Syriac Tamil Early Medieval Matter of Rome Matter of France Matter of Britain Armenian Byzantine Georgian Japanese Kannada Middle Persian Turkish Medieval Old Bulgarian Old English Middle English Arabic Persian Armenian Byzantine Castilian Catalan Dutch French Georgian German Bengali Indian Old Irish Italian Korean Nepal Bhasa Norse Russian Telugu Turkish Welsh Early Modern Renaissance Baroque Modern by century th th th st v t e The term Indian classical drama refers to the tradition of dramatic literature and performance in ancient India. The origin of dramatic performance in Indian subcontinent can be traced back to as early as  BCE. Buddhist philosopher Asvaghosa who composed Buddhacarita is considered to have been the first Sanskrit dramatist.  Despite its name, a classical Sanskrit drama uses both Sanskrit and Prakrit languages giving it a bilingual nature.  Kālidāsa in the th-th century CE, was arguably one of ancient India's greatest Sanskrit dramatists. Three famous romantic plays written by Kālidāsa are the Mālavikāgnimitram  is credited with having written three plays: the comedy Ratnavali, Priyadarsika, and the Buddhist drama Nagananda. Other famous Sanskrit dramatists include Śhudraka, Bhasa, and Asvaghosa. Though numerous plays written by these playwrights are still available, little is known about the authors themselves.  Contents 	Beginnings 	Theory .	Natya Shastra 	Plays .	Mricchakatika  .	Bhasa .	Kālidāsa .	Mudrarakshasa of Vishakhadatta .	Other major plays 	Performances 	Modern Sanskrit Plays 	See also 	References 	Sources 	Further reading 	References 	Notes Beginnings The earliest-surviving fragments of Sanskrit drama date from c. BCE.  However, although there are no surviving fragments of any drama prior to this date, it is possible that early Buddhist literature provides the earliest evidence for the existence of Indian theater. The Pali suttas , who performed dramas on a stage. It is indicated that these dramas incorporated dance, but were listed as a distinct form of performance, alongside dancing, singing, and story recitations.  Since the time of Alexander the Great, the Indian subcontinent came into direct contact with Greek culture. This has led to a scholarly debate about how much influence Ancient Greek drama had upon the development of Indian theater.  Theory Natya Shastra Main article: Natya Shastra Major source of evidence for Sanskrit theatre is A Treatise on Theatre  in an hereditary process. Its aim was both to educate and to entertain.  Under the patronage of royal courts, performers belonged to professional companies that were directed by a stage manager , who may also have acted.  The theory of rasa described in the text has been a major influence on the modern theatre of India as well as Indian cinema, particularly Bollywood.  Plays Mricchakatika  Main article: Mrichakatika One of the earliest known Sanskrit plays, this play was composed by Śudraka in the nd century BC. Rife with romance, sex, royal intrigue and comedy, the juicy plot of the play has numerous twists and turns. The main story is about a young man named Charudatta, and his love for Vasantasena, a rich courtesan or nagarvadhu. The love affair is complicated by a royal courtier, who is also attracted to Vasantasena. The plot is further complicated by thieves and mistaken identities, and thus making it a greatly hilarious and entertaining play. It invited widespread admiration when staged in New York in . The play was made into a  Hindi movie Utsav, directed by Girish Karnad. The Indian play depicted in the  film Moulin Rouge! may have been based on The Little Clay Cart.  Bhasa Main article: Bhāsa The plays written by Bhāsa were only known to historians through the references of later writers, the manuscripts themselves being lost. Manuscripts of  plays written by him were discovered in an old library in Thiruvananthapuram  in  by the scholar Ganapati Sastri. A th play was later discovered and attributed to Bhāsa, but its authorship is disputed.  Bhasa's most famous plays are Svapna Vasavadattam . Some other plays being Pratimanātaka, Abhishekanātaka, Bālacharita, Dūtavākya, Karnabhāra, Dūtaghatotkacha, Chārudatta, Madhyamavyāyoga and Ūrubhaṅga.  Karnabhara is a critically acclaimed play and it is being subjected to lot of experimentation by the modern theatre groups in India.  Bhasa is considered to be one of the best Sanskrit playwrights, second only to Kalidasa. He is earlier than Kalidasa, and is dated to the rd or th century CE.  Kālidāsa Main article: Kālidāsa Kālidāsa . The last named play is considered to be greatest play in Sanskrit. More than a millennium later, it would so powerfully impress the famous German writer Goethe that he would write:  "Wouldst thou the young year's blossoms and the fruits of its decline And all by which the soul is charmed, enraptured, feasted, fed, Wouldst thou the earth and heaven itself in one sole name combine? I name thee, O Shakuntala! and all at once is said. " Kālidāsa also wrote two large epic poems, Raghuvaṃśa , another 'perfect' work.  Kālidāsa's writing is characterized by the usage of simple but beautiful Sanskrit, and by his extensive use of similes. His similes have earned him the saying, Upama Kalidasasya . The full śloka reads: "upamā Kālidāsasya, Bhāraver arthagauravam | Daṇḍinah padalālityam, Māghe santi trayoguṇah ||"  Mudrarakshasa of Vishakhadatta Amongst Sanskrit plays, the historical play Mudrarakshasa is unique because it contains political intrigue and is full of life, action and sustained interest. The time period of composition is prior to  C.E. In the play, Chandragupta Maurya is ruling from Pataliputra, having deposed the last of the Nanda kings. Rakshasa the minister of Nanda, attempts to avenge his late master. Chanakya, the minister of Chandragupta succeeds in winning over Rakshasa to his master's side.  Other major plays Other great plays include Ratnavali, Nagananda and Priyadarsika by Sri Harsha , Mahendravikramavarman's Mattavilasa Prahasana, Shaktibhadra's Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi, Kulasekhara’s Subhadradhananjaya and Tapatisamvarana, Neelakantha's Kalyana Saugandhika and Sri Krishna Charita.   King Udayana in Bhasa's Swapnavasavadattam Koodiyattam—the only surviving ancient Sanskrit theatre.  Performances Sanskrit plays were very popular and were staged in ancient times all over India. Now the only surviving ancient Sanskrit drama theatre is Koodiyattam, which is preserved in Kerala by the Chakyar community. This form of Sanskrit drama is thought to be at least  years old and is one of the oldest living theatrical traditions in the world. All major Sanskrit plays such as that of Bhasa, Sri Harsha, Shaktibhadra etc. are performed in Koodiyattam. Guru Nātyāchārya Vidūshakaratnam Padma Shri Māni Mādhava Chākyār choreographed and directed plays like Kalidasa's Abhijñānaśākuntala, Vikramorvaśīya and Mālavikāgnimitra; Bhasa's Swapnavāsadatta and Pancharātra for the first time in the history of Koodiyattam. He popularised Koodiyattam and rejuvenated the only surviving Sanskrit drama theatre in India.  One of the hypotheses  of the origins of the "Trivandrum plays" of Bhasa is that these  plays were adapted from their original sources and brought to Kerala for choreography in the Koodiyattam tradition.  Modern Sanskrit Plays Manmohan Acharya, a modern Sanskrit playwright has written many plays and dance dramas. Some worth-mentioning plays are Arjuna-Pratijnaa, Shrita-kamalam, Pada-pallavam, Divya-Jayadevam, Pingalaa, Mrtyuh, Sthitaprajnah, Tantra-mahasaktih, Purva-sakuntalam, Uttara-sakuntalam and Raavanah.   Famous Indian Dance Drama, Tantram  by Srjan, Script written by Vanikavi Vidyadhar Shastri wrote three Sanskrit plays viz. Purnanandam, Kalidainyam and Durbala Balam.  Prafulla Kumar Mishra has written the plays Chitrangada and Karuna.   