Koothu From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the  film, see Koothu . Koothu Stylistic origins	Ancient Tamil music, Dance forms of Tamil Nadu Cultural origins	 BCE -  CE Ancient Tamil country Typical instruments	Miruthangam - Cymbal - Vocal Koothu or Therukoothu , is an ancient art, where artists play songs with dance and music in storytelling the epics, performed in Tamil; it is a folk art originated from the early Tamil country.   An artist depicting Kichaka Koothu is an informal dance structure, the performances generally depict scenes from ancient epics like Ramayana, Mahabharatha and Tamil other classical epics. There are traditionally no dialogues, instead only songs. Artists are trained to sing in their own voice and in a high pitch to reach the entire crowd, since no amplification technology is used. The artists are dressed up with complex heavy costumes and have a very bright elaborated makeup. They put on towering head dresses, sparkling shoulder plates and wide colorful skirts. Traditionally this theater form has been predominately male, though in modern times more females have been included .  Types of koothu includes Nattu Koothu, Kuravai Koothu, and Valli Koorhu, which are about the state and culture of different peoples in Tamil country; Samaya Koothu showcase religious topics, while Porkaala Koothu, Pei Koothu, Thunangai Koothu are focused on the martial arts and war of the country. Another important art form viz, Chakyar koothu is very popular in Kerala. There is mention of this koothu in Silapathikaram.   An artist depicting Kovalan In years past there were no formal training institutions, schools or nattuvanar .  It is very popular among the rural areas and has remained relatively unchanged even in modern times. Koothu eventually spread out from Tamil Nadu intomost of south India, particularly Karnatakka and Kerala.  The deity at the Thillai Nataraja Temple, Chidambaram is known from the Sangam period as "Thillai Koothan", the cosmic dancer of Thillai; the Sanskrit translation of this is Nataraja.  Contents  	Outside India 	See also 	References 	External links Outside India As the Tamils diaspora migrated abroad to different areas such as Mauritius , Re-union , Guyana and Fiji during British and French Colonial times, they took this dance form to their new settlements.  In Fiji - this Therukootu is known as Tirikutu.   