f a series on Dravidian culture and history Origins History Culture Language Religion Regions People Politics Portal:Dravidian civilizations v t e Part of a series on History of Tamil Nadu Main Sangam period Medieval history v t e Part of a series on the History of Kerala Main Other topics v t e Part of a series on Sri Lankan Tamils Ancient era Middle Ages Colonial Post independence Civil war History of Eastern Tamils Tamil Eelam portal Tamil people portal Sri Lanka portal v t e Contents    Etymology    Extent    Subdivisions . Kingdoms . Nadus . Nadus outside Tamiḻakam    Geocultural unity    Cultural influence    Religion    See also    Notes    References   Sources .    Printed sources Etymology "Tamiḻakam" is a portmanteau of a word and suffix from the Tamil language, namely Tamiḻ and -akam. It can be roughly translated as the "homeland of the Tamils". According to Kamil Zvelebil, the term seems to be the most ancient term used to designate Tamil territory in the Indian subcontinent.  The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, as well as Ptolemy's writings, mention the term "Limyrike" which corresponds to the Malabar Coast of south-western India. Based on a misinterpretation of the Roman map Tabula Peutingeriana and the possible phonetic connection between the words "Damir-" and "Tamil", some modern scholars have wrongly mentioned Limyrike as "Damirica" , considering it as a synonym of "Tamilakam". The "Damirice" mentioned in the Tabula Peutingeriana actually refers to an area between the Himalayas and the Ganges.  Extent The term "Tamilakam" appears to be the most ancient term used for designating the Tamil territory. The earliest sources to mention it include Purananuru . and Patiṟṟuppattu Patikam ..  The Silappadikaram  defines the Tamilakam as follows:  “   The Tamil region extends from the hills of Vishnu .   ” While these ancient texts do not clearly define the eastern and western boundaries of the Tamilakam, scholars assume that these boundaries were the seas, which may explain their omission from the ancient definition.  Subdivisions Kingdoms Main article: History of Tamil Nadu Approximately during the period between  BCE to  CE, Tamiḻakam was ruled by the three Tamil dynasties: the Chola dynasty, the Pandyan dynasty, Satyaputra dynasty and the Chera dynasty. There were also a few independent chieftains, the Velirs. During the time of the Maurya Empire in North India  the Cheras, the Pandyas and the Cholas were in a late megalithic phase on the western coast of Tamiḻakam. The earliest datable references to the Tamil kingdoms are in inscriptions from the rd century BCE during the time of the Maurya Empire.  The Pandyan dynasty ruled parts of South India until the early th century. The heartland of the Pandyas was the fertile valley of the Vaigai River. They initially ruled their country from Korkai, a seaport on the southernmost tip of the Indian Peninsula, and in later times moved to Madurai. The Chola dynasty ruled from before the Sangam period  until the th century over an area corresponding to modern-day western Tamil Nadu and Kerala.  The Vealirs  were minor dynastic kings and aristocratic chieftains in Tamiḻakam in the early historic period of South India.  Nadus Tamiḻakam was divided into political regions called Perunadu or "Great country", "nadu" means country.  There were three important political regions which were Chera Nadu, Along these three there were two more political regions of Athiyaman Nadu  which were later on absorbed into Chera resp. Pandya Nadu by rd century BCE. Thondai Nadu which was under Chola Nadu, later emerged as independent Pallava Nadu by th century ADE.  Again Tamilakam resp. Perunadus was resp. were divided into  socio-geographical regions called Nadu or "country". Each of this Nadu had their own dialect of Tamil.  Thenpandi Nadu Panri Nadu Kuda nadu Punal nadu Puzhinadu Venad Aruva nadu Kakkanad Kuttanadu Aruva Vadathalai nadu Sida nadu Malai Nadu Nadus outside Tamiḻakam Some other Nadus were also mentioned in Tamil literatures which weren't part of Tamilakam, but the countries traded with Tamils in ancient times.  Tamil speaking lands: Eela Nadu  Naga Nadu or Yazh Kuthanadu  Vanni Nadu  Other:  Vengi Nadu Chavaka Nadu  Kadara Nadu  Kalinga Nadu Singhala Nadu  Tulu Nadu  Vadugu Nadu  Kannada Nadu   Erumai Nadu  Telunka Nadu   Kolla Nadu  Vanka Nadu  Magadha Nadu  Kucala Nadu  Konkana Nadu  Kampocha Nadu   Palantivu Nadu   Kupaka Nadu  Marattha Nadu  Vatuka Nadu  Tinmaitivu  Geocultural unity Although the area covered by the term "Tamilakam" was divided among multiple kingdoms, its occurrence in the ancient literature implies that the region's inhabitants shared a cultural or ethnic identity, or at least regarded themselves as distinct from their neighbours.  However, the archaeological evidence does not support the existence of "Tamilakam" as a distinct cultural region: the material culture and habitations discovered in present-day Tamil Nadu and Kerala are also found elsewhere in peninsular India and Sri Lanka.  Cultural influence See also: Sri Lankan Tamils and Sri Lankan Civil War With the advent of the early historical period in South India with great accuracy and older ones were being excavated throguh archaeological means before the Civil War lead to widespread destruction of historically Tamil Lands in Sri Lanka.~   