f drama that has played a unique and important role historically in the self-definition of Western civilisation.  From its origins in the theatre of ancient Greece  years ago, from which there survives only a fraction of the work of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides; through its singular articulations in the works of Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, Jean Racine, and Friedrich Schiller to the more recent naturalistic tragedy of August Strindberg; Samuel Beckett's modernist meditations on death, loss and suffering; Müller's postmodernist reworkings of the tragic canon; and Joshua Oppenheimer's incorporation of tragic pathos in his nonfiction film, The Act of Killing , tragedy has remained an important site of cultural experimentation, negotiation, struggle, and change.  In the wake of Aristotle's Poetics . In the modern era, tragedy has also been defined against drama, melodrama, the tragicomic, and epic theatre.  Contents    Origin    Greek    Roman    Renaissance . Influence of Greek and Roman . Britain . Opera    Neo-classical    Bourgeois    Modern development    Theories . Aristotle . Hegel    Similar dramatic forms in world theatre . Ancient Indian drama   See also   Notes   References   Sources   External links Origin  Aristotle's Tragic Plot Structure The word "tragedy" appears to have been used to describe different phenomena at different times. It derives from Classical Greek τραγῳδία, contracted from trag. Scholars suspect this may be traced to a time when a goat was either the prize  Writing in  BCE :  Anyway, arising from an improvisatory beginning ,  of it had appeared; and, passing through many changes, tragedy came to a halt, since it had attained its own nature.  — Poetics IV, a – In the same work, Aristotle attempts to provide a scholastic definition of what tragedy is:  Tragedy is, then, an enactment of a deed that is important and complete, and of  emotions.  — Poetics, VI b – There is some dissent to the dithyrambic origins of tragedy, mostly based on the differences between the shapes of their choruses and styles of dancing. Friedrich Nietzsche discussed the origins of Greek tragedy in his early book The Birth of Tragedy . Here, he suggests the name originates in the use of a chorus of goat-like satyrs in the original dithyrambs from which the tragic genre developed.  Scott Scullion writes:  There is abundant evidence for tragoidia understood as "song for the prize goat". The best-known evidence is Horace, Ars poetica - ; the clearest is Eustathius .: "They called those competing tragedians, clearly because of the song over the billy goat"...  Greek  Mask of Dionysus. Greek, Myrina, nd century BCE. Main article: Greek tragedy Athenian tragedy—the oldest surviving form of tragedy—is a type of dance-drama that formed an important part of the theatrical culture of the city-state.  Athenian tragedies were performed in late March/early April at an annual state religious festival in honor of Dionysus. The presentations took the form of a contest between three playwrights, who presented their works on three successive days. Each playwright offered a tetralogy consisting of three tragedies and a concluding comic piece called a satyr play.  All of the choral parts were sung .  Many ancient Greek tragedians employed the ekkyklêma as a theatrical device, which was a platform hidden behind the scene that could be rolled out to display the aftermath of some event which had happened out of sight of the audience. This event was frequently a brutal murder of some sort, an act of violence which could not be effectively portrayed visually, but an action of which the other characters must see the effects in order for it to have meaning and emotional resonance. A prime example of the use of the ekkyklêma is after the murder of Agamemnon in the first play of Aeschylus' Oresteia, when the king's butchered body is wheeled out in a grand display for all to see. Variations on the ekkyklêma are used in tragedies and other forms to this day, as writers still find it a useful and often powerful device for showing the consequences of extreme human actions. Another such device was a crane, the mechane, which served to hoist a god or goddess on stage when they were supposed to arrive flying. This device gave origin to the phrase "deus ex machina" , that is, the surprise intervention of an unforeseen external factor that changes the outcome of an event.  Roman  Scene from the tragedy Iphigenia in Tauris by Euripides. Roman fresco in Pompeii. Following the expansion of the Roman Republic  into several Greek territories between – BCE, Rome encountered Greek tragedy.  From the time of the empire, the tragedies of two playwrights survive—one is an unknown author, while the other is the Stoic philosopher Seneca.  Seneca's tragedies rework those of all three of the Athenian tragic playwrights whose work has survived. Probably meant to be recited at elite gatherings, they differ from the Greek versions in their long declamatory, narrative accounts of action, their obtrusive moralising, and their bombastic rhetoric. They dwell on detailed accounts of horrible deeds and contain long reflective soliloquies. Though the gods rarely appear in these plays, ghosts and witches abound. Senecan tragedies explore ideas of revenge, the occult, the supernatural, suicide, blood and gore. The Renaissance scholar Julius Caesar Scaliger , who knew both Latin and Greek, preferred Seneca to Euripides.  Renaissance Influence of Greek and Roman Classical Greek drama was largely forgotten in Western Europe from the Middle Ages to the beginning of the th century. Medieval theatre was dominated by mystery plays, morality plays, farces and miracle plays. In Italy, the models for tragedy in the later Middle Ages were Roman, particularly the works of Seneca, interest in which was reawakened by the Paduan Lovato de' Lovati .  In  Gian Giorgio Trissino ; and a Sophonisba by Galeotto del Carretto of .  From about  printed copies, in the original languages, of the works of Sophocles, Seneca, and Euripides, as well as comedic writers such as Aristophanes, Terence and Plautus, were available in Europe and the next forty years saw humanists and poets translating and adapting their tragedies. In the s, the European university setting  written by scholars. The influence of Seneca was particularly strong in its humanist tragedy. His plays, with their ghosts, lyrical passages and rhetorical oratory, brought a concentration on rhetoric and language over dramatic action to many humanist tragedies.  The most important sources for French tragic theatre in the Renaissance were the example of Seneca and the precepts of Horace and Aristotle  would become increasingly important as models by the middle of the th century. Important models were also supplied by the Spanish Golden Age playwrights Pedro Calderón de la Barca, Tirso de Molina and Lope de Vega, many of whose works were translated and adapted for the French stage.  Britain  Edwin Austin Abbey  King Lear, Cordelia's Farewell See also: English Renaissance theatre, Shakespearean tragedy, Revenge play, and Domestic tragedy The common forms are the:  Tragedy of circumstance: people are born into their situations, and do not choose them; such tragedies explore the consequences of birthrights, particularly for monarchs Tragedy of miscalculation: the protagonist's error of judgement has tragic consequences Revenge play In English, the most famous and most successful tragedies are those of William Shakespeare and his Elizabethan contemporaries. Shakespeare's tragedies include:  Antony and Cleopatra Coriolanus Hamlet Julius Caesar King Lear Macbeth Othello Romeo and Juliet Timon of Athens Titus Andronicus Troilus and Cressida A contemporary of Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, also wrote examples of tragedy in English, notably:  The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus Tamburlaine the Great John Webster , also wrote famous plays of the genre:  The Duchess of Malfi The White Devil Opera Contemporary with Shakespeare, an entirely different approach to facilitating the rebirth of tragedy was taken in Italy. Jacopo Peri, in the preface to his Euridice refers to "the ancient Greeks and Romans  was to support Wagner in his claims to be a successor of the ancient dramatists.  Neo-classical  French actor Talma as Nero in Racine's Britannicus. For much of the th century, Pierre Corneille, who made his mark on the world of tragedy with plays like Medée , for they had happy endings. In his theoretical works on theatre, Corneille redefined both comedy and tragedy around the following suppositions:  The stage—in both comedy and tragedy—should feature noble characters . Tragedy deals with affairs of the state ; comedy deals with love. For a work to be tragic, it need not have a tragic ending. Although Aristotle says that catharsis  should be the goal of tragedy, this is only an ideal. In conformity with the moral codes of the period, plays should not show evil being rewarded or nobility being degraded. Corneille continued to write plays through   and the success of Jean Racine from the late s signalled the end of his preeminence.  Jean Racine's tragedies—inspired by Greek myths, Euripides, Sophocles and Seneca—condensed their plot into a tight set of passionate and duty-bound conflicts between a small group of noble characters, and concentrated on these characters' double-binds and the geometry of their unfulfilled desires and hatreds. Racine's poetic skill was in the representation of pathos and amorous passion  opened new doors to biblical subject matter and to the use of theatre in the education of young women. Racine also faced criticism for his irregularities: when his play, Bérénice, was criticised for not containing any deaths, Racine disputed the conventional view of tragedy.  For more on French tragedy of the th and th centuries, see French Renaissance literature and French literature of the th century.  Bourgeois Further information: Bourgeois tragedy and Augustan drama Bourgeois tragedy  is a form that developed in th-century Europe. It was a fruit of the Enlightenment and the emergence of the bourgeois class and its ideals. It is characterised by the fact that its protagonists are ordinary citizens. The first true bourgeois tragedy was an English play, George Lillo's The London Merchant; or, the History of George Barnwell, which was first performed in . Usually, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's play Miss Sara Sampson, which was first produced in , is said to be the earliest Bürgerliches Trauerspiel in Germany.  Modern development In modernist literature, the definition of tragedy has become less precise. The most fundamental change has been the rejection of Aristotle's dictum that true tragedy can only depict those with power and high status. Arthur Miller's essay "Tragedy and the Common Man"  argues that tragedy may also depict ordinary people in domestic surroundings.  Theories Aristotle Further information: Poetics  Aristotle wrote in his work Poetics that tragedy is characterised by seriousness and involves a great person who experiences a reversal of fortune  or healing for the audience through their experience of these emotions in response to the suffering of the characters in the drama.  According to Aristotle, "the structure of the best tragedy should not be simple but complex and one that represents incidents arousing fear and pity—for that is peculiar to this form of art."  In addition, the tragic hero may achieve some revelation or recognition  about human fate, destiny, and the will of the gods. Aristotle terms this sort of recognition "a change from ignorance to awareness of a bond of love or hate."  In Poetics, Aristotle gave the following definition in ancient Greek of the word "tragedy" :  "Ἔστιν οὖν τραγῳδία μίμησις πράξεως σπουδαίας καὶ τελείας μέγεθος ἐχούσης, ἡδυσμένῳ λόγῳ χωρὶς ἑκάστῳ τῶν εἰδῶν ἐν τοῖς μορίοις, δρώντων καὶ οὐ δι᾽ ἀπαγγελίας, δι᾽ ἐλέου καὶ φόβου περαίνουσα τὴν τῶν τοιούτων παθημάτων κάθαρσιν."  which means Tragedy is an imitation of an action that is admirable, complete , and possesses magnitude; in language made pleasurable, each of its species separated in different parts; performed by actors, not through narration; effecting through pity and fear the purification of such emotions.  Common usage of tragedy refers to any story with a sad ending, whereas to be an Aristotelian tragedy the story must fit the set of requirements as laid out by Poetics. By this definition social drama cannot be tragic because the hero in it is a victim of circumstance and incidents that depend upon the society in which he lives and not upon the inner compulsions — psychological or religious — which determine his progress towards self-knowledge and death. Exactly what constitutes a "tragedy", however, is a frequently debated matter.  According to Aristotle, there are four species of tragedy:  . Complex, which involves Peripety and Discovery  . Suffering, tragedies of such nature can be seen in the Greek mythological stories of Ajaxes and Ixions  . Character, a tragedy of moral or ethical character. Tragedies of this nature can be found in Phthiotides and Peleus  . Spectacle, that of a horror-like theme. Examples of this nature are Phorcides and Prometheus  Hegel G.W.F. Hegel, the German philosopher most famous for his dialectical approach to epistemology and history, also applied such a methodology to his theory of tragedy. In his essay "Hegel's Theory of Tragedy," A.C. Bradley first introduced the English-speaking world to Hegel's theory, which Bradley called the "tragic collision", and contrasted against the Aristotelian notions of the "tragic hero" and his or her "hamartia" in subsequent analyses of the Aeschylus' Oresteia trilogy and of Sophocles' Antigone. Hegel himself, however, in his seminal "The Phenomenology of Spirit" argues for a more complicated theory of tragedy, with two complementary branches which, though driven by a single dialectical principle, differentiate Greek tragedy from that which follows Shakespeare. His later lectures formulate such a theory of tragedy as a conflict of ethical forces, represented by characters, in ancient Greek tragedy, but in Shakespearean tragedy the conflict is rendered as one of subject and object, of individual personality which must manifest self-destructive passions because only such passions are strong enough to defend the individual from a hostile and capricious external world:  The heroes of ancient classical tragedy encounter situations in which, if they firmly decide in favor of the one ethical pathos that alone suits their finished character, they must necessarily come into conflict with the equally   Hegel's comments on a particular play may better elucidate his theory: "Viewed externally, Hamlet's death may be seen to have been brought about accidentally... but in Hamlet's soul, we understand that death has lurked from the beginning: the sandbank of finitude cannot suffice his sorrow and tenderness, such grief and nausea at all conditions of life... we feel he is a man whom inner disgust has almost consumed well before death comes upon him from outside."  Similar dramatic forms in world theatre Ancient Indian drama The writer Bharata Muni, in his work on dramatic theory A Treatise on Theatre . Jatis are elaborated in greater detail in the text Dattilam, composed around the same time as the Treatise.  The celebrated ancient Indian epic, Mahabharata, can also be related to tragedy in some ways. According to Hermann Oldenberg, the original epic once carried an immense "tragic force". It was common in Sanskrit drama to adapt episodes from the Mahabharata into dramatic form.  ~   