   Book: Tours & Activities | Tailor-made Tours  English  Search... Explore Book Travel Share   Unicorn Gundam Statue in Odaiba   Feast your eyes on Odaiba's new Unicorn Gundam Tokyo Odaiba Culture  Tom Roseveare | JT  By Ignatius Koh   Dec ,  Gundam fans and everyone else, rejoice. Odaiba's much-loved full-scale replica Gundam is back – even bigger and better than before. Say hello to the RX- Unicorn Gundam replica from the Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn series. Parked in front of DiverCity Tokyo Plaza, the new life-sized Gundam statue now towers over spectators at a staggering height of . metres.  If you have been to Odaiba before, you would have seen the classic RX-- Gundam statue – arguably the former centrepiece of the man-made island – and probably had a photo taken with it. It was removed in the spring of  and in September , the Unicorn—. meters taller—was unveiled in its place.   Unicorn gundam basking in the evening glow. Unicorn gundam basking in the evening glow.  What’s new about the Unicorn is that unlike its predecessor, it can switch between two modes – Unicorn and Destroyer – and you can catch the change a number of times each day. The Unicorn mode sees the Gundam with a single horn on its head, while the Destroyer mode reveals the statue’s hidden light panels.  The transformation happens at am, pm, pm, and pm. The armour plates shift during the change and this happens in around  seconds, so prepare your cameras for the moment.  The visual display continues into the night as after the sun sets, the statue lights up, with the Destroyer mode’s panels glowing like beacons in the night.   Destroy Mode illumination after dusk. Destroy Mode illumination after dusk.  That’s not all there is. Anime clips are projected onto the exterior of Diver City and various Gundam theme songs are played from speakers at .pm to .pm every half hour. You can also see the statue transform to Unicorn Mode and back during those timings.  Whether you’re a fan or just visiting, the Unicorn is definitely a must-see in Tokyo and you’ll be hard-pressed to find a sleeker statue around.   Ignatius Koh Written by Ignatius Koh Japan Travel Editor Tokyo  RELATED TOPICS Things to Do in Tokyo  Japan on a budget  Robots in Japan    Unicorn gundam basking in the evening glow.    Destroy Mode illumination after dusk. + Information  −− Aomi, Koto, Tokyo 〒-   Official Website  Things to Do in Tokyo Japan on a budget  Robots in Japan  Book your trip Hotels Flights Rental car  Destination  City, Region, Country, Landmark, Hotel, District Check-in date Check-out date  I don't have specific dates yet  EXPLORE NEARBY Real-Size Gundam in Odaiba Real-Size Gundam in Odaiba By Tomoko Kamishima  Odaiba's Diver City Tokyo Plaza Odaiba's Diver City Tokyo Plaza By Naomi Isaka  Calbee+ Café &amp; Souvenir Shop Odaiba Calbee+ Café & Souvenir Shop Odaiba By Jessica A Paje  Gundam Statue &amp; Gundam Front Tokyo Gundam Statue & Gundam Front Tokyo By Jessica A Paje  TOP ARTICLES Recommended Popular Latest   Kumano Kodo Iseji: Binshiyama and the Magose-Toge Pass   Luxury Resorts and Hot Spring Experiences in Setouchi   Hasedera Temple and Abe Monjuin Temple   Back in Time on the Tokyo Sakura Tram    Tanzan Jinja   Osaka Expo Commemoration Park   Top  Hotels and Views Across the Setouchi   Water Hotel S: The Perfect Couples Retreat   The Ancient Yamato Region   Machida Tenmangu Shrine  MORE FROM THIS CATEGORY Kyushu Superlatives Kyushu Superlatives By Lisa Wallin  Discover Kyushu Discover Kyushu By Lisa Wallin  Explore the Heart of Japan Explore the Heart of Japan By Lisa Wallin  Hachiko Statue University of Tokyo Hachiko Statue University of Tokyo By Jessica A Paje  JOIN THE DISCUSSION  Share your thoughts with us  See something wrong?   Preethu Preethu  months ago I have seen this when the building was under construction. Reply  comment in total   Categories Accommodation Activity Beauty & Spa Culture Food Nightlife Shopping Transportation Explore Events Features Guides Japan Map News Questions Tours Videos About About us Advertise Careers Company Intern Rewards Travel Agency BB Partners Destinations Hiroshima Hokkaido Kobe Kyoto Okinawa Osaka Tokyo Yokohama Follow Japan Travel  Japan Travel is the leading resource for Japan travel information and the primary destination for visitors planning and traveling to Japan.  Subscribe  Your e-mail address  Contact | Terms| Privacy| Custom Tour Bookings| 広告について  English ©  Japan Travel K.K. 