ōcho Kiritani Announce Nuptials Apr   cm/s Featured Train Station Will Play Heartwrenching Theme Apr  Manga Creator Reiji Yamada Explains Why Mr. Osomatsu's nd Season Bombed in Japan Apr  Ōgaki City's Original Anime Short Brings the Warring States to Modern Day Apr  Newspaper: Miyazaki Still in Shock After Passing of Director Takahata Apr  MF Ghost Manga Hints Connection to Initial D's Takumi Press Releases Apr  ANIPLUS Asia to Simulcast Steins;Gate  Apr  Mobile Suit Gundam  Coming to Blu-ray and DVD Starting July  and Mobile Suit Gundam AGE: Memory of Eden OVA Coming to Blu-ray and DVD July  from Right Stuf, Inc. and Sunrise Inc. Apr  Right Stuf, Inc. and Nozomi Entertainment Announce Release Details For Mobile Suit Gundam ; and the Blu-ray Release of Sweet Blue Flowers  Apr  SNK Heroines Tag Team Frenzy Arrives September ,  For Nintendo Switch™ And Playstation® Apr  SNK th Anniversary Collection Comes To Nintendo Switch™ Fall  Apr  Spring Brings %OFF Deals on Two KEMCO RPGs for Nintendo DS Views Features Apr  Interview with Okamoto's at Sakura-Con  Apr  Interview: Big Fish & Begonia Directors Zhang Chun and Liang Xuan Apr  The Complete Guide to Tokyo Ghoul Apr  Ghibli Museum Report: Hayao Miyazaki's Latest Film Apr  Special Report: FLCL Alternative episode  Apr  Premiere Report: My Hero Academia Season  Apr  The Spring  Anime Preview Guide Mar  Our Most Anticipated Anime of Spring  Reviews Apr  Yume Nikki - I Am Not in Your Dream Novel Apr  Kenka Bancho Otome: Love's Battle Royale GN  Apr  Laid-Back Camp GN  Apr  Big Fish & Begonia Apr  Kabaneri of the Iron Fortress BD/DVD Apr  Yuri!!! on ICE BD+DVD Apr  Children of the Whales Apr  Dragon Half  GN  Columns Apr  Shelf Life - Akiba's Trip Apr  Answerman - Is It Really Illegal To Take Pictures Of People Without Permission? Apr  The List -  More Weird Evangelion Products Apr  Vice & Luna - Franxx, But No Franxx Mar  ANNCast - Remember Gundam? Mar  This Week in Anime - A Place Further Than the Universe and Back Again Mar  This Week in Games - Dragon Quest XI Mar  The Mike Toole Show - Poster Children Everything Features  Reviews  Columns  Editorials  New Anime Upcoming Anime List Upcoming DVD & Blu-Ray Spring  Anime Spotlight Lost Song STEINS;GATE  Libra of Nil Admirari The Legend of the Galactic Heroes: Die Neue These » previous seasons Spring  Preview Guide Gegege no Kitaro Magical Girl Ore Umamusume: Pretty Derby Kakuriyo Fist of the Blue Sky: Regenesis Gundam Build Divers Legend of the Galactic Heroes: Die Neue These Tokyo Ghoul:re Lupin The rd Part  Real Girl Tada Never Falls In Love Comic Girls MEGALOBOX Dances with the Dragons Gurazeni: Money Pitch Lostorage conflated WIXOSS Magical Girl Site MAJOR nd My Hero Academia season  HINAMATSURI Sword Art Online Alternative: Gun Gale Online PERSONA  the Animation Devils' Line Amanchu! Advance Libra of Nil Admirari Cutie Honey Universe Caligula Golden Kamuy Cute High Earth Defense Club HAPPY KISS! » previous seasons Daily Streaming Reviews A Place Further Than the Universe # After the Rain # BEATLESS # Black Clover # Boruto: Naruto Next Generations # Cardcaptor Sakura: Clear Card # DARLING in the FRANXX # Death March to The Parallel World Rhapsody # Food Wars! The Third Plate # GARO -Vanishing Line- # Gintama # How to keep a mummy # Killing Bites # KOKKOKU # Maerchen Maedchen # March comes in like a lion #- Mitsuboshi Colors # Mr. Osomatsu Season  # My Hero Academia # One Piece # Overlord II # Pop Team Epic # Pop Team Epic # Record of Grancrest War #- School Babysitters # Today's Menu for the Emiya Family # Violet Evergarden # Encyclopedia Anime  Search anime  Top  Licensed Latest in Japan Upcoming TV series, movies, OAVs Manga  Search manga  Top  Licensed Latest in Japan People  Search people  Most prolific cast Most prolific staff Releases  Search releases  This month Companies  Search companies  Licensors Lexicon  Search lexicon  Tools Search by genre, theme, year Comparison tool Personal settings more » Forum Forum Categories Site-Related General Industry For Subscribers Forums Talkback Anime > Series Discussion Manga Encyclopedia Feedback Retail Community Forum Information Search FAQ Usergroups My ANN Public Public Anime Lists Surveys Contests & Giveaways Subscribers Subscriber Forum Subscribe » Personal My Anime My Manga Change skin My Anime   About Our Team Contact us Staff openings Privacy policy Copyright policy Advertise with ANN Help FAQ Bugs & Technical Questions Forum  Login or Register  Username or Email   forgot it?  remember me   Login with Facebook  Login with Twitter  No account yet? Registering is free, easy, and private. Discuss in the forum, contribute to the Encyclopedia, build your own MyAnime lists, and more.  Email  ×We need your help. Good journalism costs money, and advertising doesn’t bring in what it used to. For just $ a month you can help secure Anime News Network’s future. News Sunrise Reveals Gundam Build Divers TV Anime for Spring Premiere posted on -- : EST by Crystalyn Hodgkins Upcoming show's English-subtitled -minute prologue video streamed Sunrise opened a website on Friday to reveal Gundam Build Divers, a new television anime series in the Gundam Build Fighters franchise that will premiere on TV Tokyo and its affiliates this spring. The Gundam.info portal site began streaming an English-subtitled prologue video on Friday for the new anime.    The site describes the prologue:  The Gunpla Force Battle Tournament is a big event held in GBN once per year. Competing in the final round are Avalon, led by the champion Kyoya Kujo, and the elite th Panzer Division led by the cunning Rommel. Starting with Kyoya's Gundam AGE II Magnum, a variety of Gunpla take to the field to determine which is the strongest force! The show stars:  Yūsuke Kobayashi as Riku Mikami     Natsumi Fujiwara as Yukio Hidaka     Nene Hieda as Yashiro Momoka     Haruka Terui as Sera    Jun Kasama as Kyōya Kujō    Sho Hayami as Rommel   The staff includes:  Planning: Sunrise Director: Shinya Watada Original Work: Hajime Yatate, Yoshiyuki Tomino Series Composition: Noboru Kimura Original Character Designs: Hiro Harakazu Character Designs: Shuri Toida Mechanical Designs: Kunio Okawara, Kanetake Ebikawa, Junichi Akutsu, Junya Ishigaki, Ippei Gyōbu, Kenji Teraoka, Shinya Terashima, Takayuki Yanase, Naohiro Washio Action Director: Masami Obari Chief Mecha Animators: Shinya Kusumegi, Sakiko Uda Art: Studio Naya Music: Hideakira Kimura Planning Cooperation: Bandai Hobby Division Production Cooperation: ADK Production: TV Tokyo, Sunrise, Sotsu   The official website for the Gundam Build Fighters franchise teased in December that there would be a new project for the franchise, stating that it would reveal more information on February .  The first Gundam Build Fighters television anime series aired from October  to March . Gundam Build Fighters Try aired from October  to April , and the Gundam Build Fighters Try Island Wars television special aired in August . Gundam.info streamed both series and the special with English subtitles as they aired in Japan, and Crunchyroll later added the two series streaming. Right Stuf released both on Blu-ray Disc and DVD in North America in .  The Gundam Build _Extra Battle Project project is comprised of two different anime: Gundam Build Fighters: GM no Gyakushū  and Gundam Build Fighters: Battlogue. The Gundam.info portal site also began streaming the Gundam Build Fighters: GM no Gyakushū anime in August. The site also streamed the five-episode Gundam Build Fighters: Battlogue anime as new episodes premiered once a month from August through December.  Source: Comic Natalie  discuss this in the forum  | bookmark/share with: News homepage / archives   RightStuf - Anime, Manga and More  ⬋-  FEATURE  comments The Spring  Anime Preview Guide Apr , : anime The Spring  Anime Season has begun - check back daily for fresh reviews of all of this season's premieres! Available Now: Golden Kamuy - Cute High Earth Defense Club HAPPY KISS! - Caligula - Cutie Honey Universe - Libra of Nil Admirari - Persona  the Animation - Sword Art Online Alternative: Gun Gale Online - HINAMATSURI - My Hero Academia season  - and much more! COLUMN  comments Shelf Life - Akiba's Trip Apr , : anime James takes a look at Gonzo's cartoonish clothes-stripping comedy, while Paul runs down all this week's new releases, along with a new Shelf Obsessed collection! COLUMN  comments Answerman - Is It Really Illegal To Take Pictures Of People Without Permission? Apr , : anime You hear it often that taking photos of anyone in Japan without their permission is illegal - is that true, and how did those laws come about? Justin gets into it. REVIEW  comments Yume Nikki - I Am Not in Your Dream Novel Apr , : novel The deeply unsettling cult smash PC game is adapted as a chilling, brain-twisting light novel - Rebecca Silverman may never dream the same again. REVIEW  comments Kenka Bancho Otome: Love's Battle Royale GN  Apr , : manga Roundhouse kick your way to romance with this otome game adaptation about a girl disguised as a boy fighting her own love interests! Rebecca Silverman has the details. COLUMN  comments The List -  More Weird Evangelion Products Apr , : anime From fishing gear to bullet trains, there really is nothing you can't buy with Shinji and his friends stamped on it. Here are seven more weird EVA collector's items from Japan. FEATURE  comments Interview with Okamoto's at Sakura-Con  Apr , : music The punk-rock band behind fan-favorite theme songs from Naruto Shippuden to Durarara!! sits down to discuss writing music for anime and touring in America. COLUMN  comments Answerman - Why Aren't More Original Anime Made? Apr , : industry There's an avalanche of anime these days, but a huge percentage of it is adapted from a manga, light novel or video game - why isn't there more original work? Justin considers the angles. REVIEW  comments Laid-Back Camp GN  Apr , : manga With its slow pace and surprisingly layered characters, Laid-Back Camp makes off-season camping look fun. Rebecca Silverman has the details. All material Copyright © - Anime News Network. All rights reserved. served by mayu-chan via Ezoic  cloudflare ray# fcfaeae-NRT Target URL : https://a.adform.net/C/?bn= x pixel counter :  ~ 