Graph theory From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about sets of vertices connected by edges. For graphs of mathematical functions, see Graph of a function. For other uses, see Graph .  A drawing of a graph In mathematics, graph theory is the study of graphs, which are mathematical structures used to model pairwise relations between objects. A graph in this context is made up of vertices, nodes, or points which are connected by edges, arcs, or lines. A graph may be undirected, meaning that there is no distinction between the two vertices associated with each edge, or its edges may be directed from one vertex to another; see Graph  for more detailed definitions and for other variations in the types of graph that are commonly considered. Graphs are one of the prime objects of study in discrete mathematics.  Refer to the glossary of graph theory for basic definitions in graph theory.  Contents  	Definitions .	Graph 	Applications 	 istory 	Graph drawing 	Graph-theoretic data structures 	Problems .	Enumeration .	Subgraphs, induced subgraphs, and minors .	Graph coloring .	Subsumption and unification .	Route problems .	Network flow .	Visibility problems .	Covering problems .	Decomposition problems .	Graph classes 	See also .	Related topics .	Algorithms .	Subareas .	Related areas of mathematics .	Generalizations .	Prominent graph theorists 	Notes 	References 	External links .	Online textbooks Definitions Definitions in graph theory vary. The following are some of the more basic ways of defining graphs and related mathematical structures.  Graph In the most common sense of the term, a graph is an ordered pair G = . To avoid ambiguity, this type of graph may be described precisely as undirected and simple.  Other senses of graph stem from different conceptions of the edge set. In one more generalized notion, V is a set together with a relation of incidence that associates with each edge two vertices. In another generalized notion, E is a multiset of unordered pairs of  vertices. Many authors call this type of object a multigraph or pseudograph.  All of these variants and others are described more fully below.  The vertices belonging to an edge are called the ends or end vertices of the edge. A vertex may exist in a graph and not belong to an edge.  V and E are usually taken to be finite, and many of the well-known results are not true  is counted twice.  For an edge , graph theorists usually use the somewhat shorter notation xy.  Applications  The network graph formed by Wikipedia editors  during one month in summer  Graphs can be used to model many types of relations and processes in physical, biological, social and information systems. Many practical problems can be represented by graphs. Emphasizing their application to real-world systems, the term network is sometimes defined to mean a graph in which attributes  are associated with the nodes and/or edges.  In computer science, graphs are used to represent networks of communication, data organization, computational devices, the flow of computation, etc. For instance, the link structure of a website can be represented by a directed graph, in which the vertices represent web pages and directed edges represent links from one page to another. A similar approach can be taken to problems in social media,, and many other fields. The development of algorithms to handle graphs is therefore of major interest in computer science. The transformation of graphs is often formalized and represented by graph rewrite systems. Complementary to graph transformation systems focusing on rule-based in-memory manipulation of graphs are graph databases geared towards transaction-safe, persistent storing and querying of graph-structured data.  Graph-theoretic methods, in various forms, have proven particularly useful in linguistics, since natural language often lends itself well to discrete structure. Traditionally, syntax and compositional semantics follow tree-based structures, whose expressive power lies in the principle of compositionality, modeled in a hierarchical graph. More contemporary approaches such as head-driven phrase structure grammar model the syntax of natural language using typed feature structures, which are directed acyclic graphs. Within lexical semantics, especially as applied to computers, modeling word meaning is easier when a given word is understood in terms of related words; semantic networks are therefore important in computational linguistics. Still, other methods in phonology  are common in the analysis of language as a graph. Indeed, the usefulness of this area of mathematics to linguistics has borne organizations such as TextGraphs, as well as various 'Net' projects, such as WordNet, VerbNet, and others.  Graph theory is also used to study molecules in chemistry and physics. In condensed matter physics, the three-dimensional structure of complicated simulated atomic structures can be studied quantitatively by gathering statistics on graph-theoretic properties related to the topology of the atoms. In chemistry a graph makes a natural model for a molecule, where vertices represent atoms and edges bonds. This approach is especially used in computer processing of molecular structures, ranging from chemical editors to database searching. In statistical physics, graphs can represent local connections between interacting parts of a system, as well as the dynamics of a physical process on such systems. Similarly, in computational neuroscience graphs can be used to represent functional connections between brain areas that interact to give rise to various cognitive processes, where the vertices represent different areas of the brain and the edges represent the connections between those areas. Graph theory plays an important role in electrical modeling of electrical networks, here, weights are associated with resistance of the wire segments to obtain electrical properties of network structures. Graphs are also used to represent the micro-scale channels of porous media, in which the vertices represent the pores and the edges represent the smaller channels connecting the pores.   Graph theory in sociology: Moreno Sociogram  Graph theory is also widely used in sociology as a way, for example, to measure actors' prestige or to explore rumor spreading, notably through the use of social network analysis software. Under the umbrella of social networks are many different types of graphs. Acquaintanceship and friendship graphs describe whether people know each other. Influence graphs model whether certain people can influence the behavior of others. Finally, collaboration graphs model whether two people work together in a particular way, such as acting in a movie together.  Likewise, graph theory is useful in biology and conservation efforts where a vertex can represent regions where certain species exist  and the edges represent migration paths or movement between the regions. This information is important when looking at breeding patterns or tracking the spread of disease, parasites or how changes to the movement can affect other species.  In mathematics, graphs are useful in geometry and certain parts of topology such as knot theory. Algebraic graph theory has close links with group theory.  A graph structure can be extended by assigning a weight to each edge of the graph. Graphs with weights, or weighted graphs, are used to represent structures in which pairwise connections have some numerical values. For example, if a graph represents a road network, the weights could represent the length of each road. There may be several weights associated with each edge, including distance , travel time, or monetary cost. Such weighted graphs are commonly used to program GPS's, and travel-planning search engines that compare flight times and costs.   istory  The Kテカnigsberg Bridge problem The paper written by Leonhard Euler on the Seven Bridges of Kテカnigsberg and published in  is regarded as the first paper in the history of graph theory. and represents the beginning of the branch of mathematics known as topology.  More than one century after Euler's paper on the bridges of Kテカnigsberg and while Listing was introducing the concept of topology, Cayley was led by an interest in particular analytical forms arising from differential calculus to study a particular class of graphs, the trees. The fusion of ideas from mathematics with those from chemistry began what has become part of the standard terminology of graph theory.  In particular, the term "graph" was introduced by Sylvester in a paper published in  in Nature, where he draws an analogy between "quantic invariants" and "co-variants" of algebra and molecular diagrams:  "" . The first textbook on graph theory was written by Dテゥnes Kナ創ig, and published in .  One of the most famous and stimulating problems in graph theory is the four color problem: "Is it true that any map drawn in the plane may have its regions colored with four colors, in such a way that any two regions having a common border have different colors?" This problem was first posed by Francis Guthrie in  and its first written record is in a letter of De Morgan addressed to  amilton the same year. Many incorrect proofs have been proposed, including those by Cayley, Kempe, and others. The study and the generalization of this problem by Tait,  eawood, Ramsey and  adwiger led to the study of the colorings of the graphs embedded on surfaces with arbitrary genus. Tait's reformulation generated a new class of problems, the factorization problems, particularly studied by Petersen and Kナ創ig. The works of Ramsey on colorations and more specially the results obtained by Turテ。n in  was at the origin of another branch of graph theory, extremal graph theory.  The four color problem remained unsolved for more than a century. In   einrich  eesch published a method for solving the problem using computers.  The autonomous development of topology from  and  fertilized graph theory back through the works of Jordan, Kuratowski and Whitney. Another important factor of common development of graph theory and topology came from the use of the techniques of modern algebra. The first example of such a use comes from the work of the physicist Gustav Kirchhoff, who published in  his Kirchhoff's circuit laws for calculating the voltage and current in electric circuits.  The introduction of probabilistic methods in graph theory, especially in the study of Erdナ壮 and Rテゥnyi of the asymptotic probability of graph connectivity, gave rise to yet another branch, known as random graph theory, which has been a fruitful source of graph-theoretic results.  Graph drawing Main article: Graph drawing Graphs are represented visually by drawing a dot or circle for every vertex, and drawing an arc between two vertices if they are connected by an edge. If the graph is directed, the direction is indicated by drawing an arrow.  A graph drawing should not be confused with the graph itself  as there are several ways to structure the graph drawing. All that matters is which vertices are connected to which others by how many edges and not the exact layout. In practice, it is often difficult to decide if two drawings represent the same graph. Depending on the problem domain some layouts may be better suited and easier to understand than others.  The pioneering work of W. T. Tutte was very influential on the subject of graph drawing. Among other achievements, he introduced the use of linear algebraic methods to obtain graph drawings.  Graph drawing also can be said to encompass problems that deal with the crossing number and its various generalizations. The crossing number of a graph is the minimum number of intersections between edges that a drawing of the graph in the plane must contain. For a planar graph, the crossing number is zero by definition.  Drawings on surfaces other than the plane are also studied.  Graph-theoretic data structures Main article: Graph  There are different ways to store graphs in a computer system. The data structure used depends on both the graph structure and the algorithm used for manipulating the graph. Theoretically one can distinguish between list and matrix structures but in concrete applications the best structure is often a combination of both. List structures are often preferred for sparse graphs as they have smaller memory requirements. Matrix structures on the other hand provide faster access for some applications but can consume huge amounts of memory.  List structures include the incidence list, an array of pairs of vertices, and the adjacency list, which separately lists the neighbors of each vertex: Much like the incidence list, each vertex has a list of which vertices it is adjacent to.  Matrix structures include the incidence matrix, a matrix of 's and 's whose rows represent vertices and whose columns represent edges, and the adjacency matrix, in which both the rows and columns are indexed by vertices. In both cases a  indicates two adjacent objects and a  indicates two non-adjacent objects. The Laplacian matrix is a modified form of the adjacency matrix that incorporates information about the degrees of the vertices, and is useful in some calculations such as Kirchhoff's theorem on the number of spanning trees of a graph. The distance matrix, like the adjacency matrix, has both its rows and columns indexed by vertices, but rather than containing a  or a  in each cell it contains the length of a shortest path between two vertices.  Problems Enumeration There is a large literature on graphical enumeration: the problem of counting graphs meeting specified conditions. Some of this work is found in  arary and Palmer .  Subgraphs, induced subgraphs, and minors A common problem, called the subgraph isomorphism problem, is finding a fixed graph as a subgraph in a given graph. One reason to be interested in such a question is that many graph properties are hereditary for subgraphs, which means that a graph has the property if and only if all subgraphs have it too. Unfortunately, finding maximal subgraphs of a certain kind is often an NP-complete problem. For example:  Finding the largest complete subgraph is called the clique problem . A similar problem is finding induced subgraphs in a given graph. Again, some important graph properties are hereditary with respect to induced subgraphs, which means that a graph has a property if and only if all induced subgraphs also have it. Finding maximal induced subgraphs of a certain kind is also often NP-complete. For example:  Finding the largest edgeless induced subgraph or independent set is called the independent set problem . Still another such problem, the minor containment problem, is to find a fixed graph as a minor of a given graph. A minor or subcontraction of a graph is any graph obtained by taking a subgraph and contracting some  edges. Many graph properties are hereditary for minors, which means that a graph has a property if and only if all minors have it too. For example, Wagner's Theorem states:  A graph is planar if it contains as a minor neither the complete bipartite graph K,  nor the complete graph K. A similar problem, the subdivision containment problem, is to find a fixed graph as a subdivision of a given graph. A subdivision or homeomorphism of a graph is any graph obtained by subdividing some  edges. Subdivision containment is related to graph properties such as planarity. For example, Kuratowski's Theorem states:  A graph is planar if it contains as a subdivision neither the complete bipartite graph K, nor the complete graph K. Another problem in subdivision containment is Kelmans窶鉄eymour conjecture:  Every -vertex-connected graph that is not planar contains a subdivision of the -vertex complete graph K. Another class of problems has to do with the extent to which various species and generalizations of graphs are determined by their point-deleted subgraphs. For example:  The reconstruction conjecture Graph coloring Main article: Graph coloring Many problems and theorems in graph theory have to do with various ways of coloring graphs. Typically, one is interested in coloring a graph so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color, or with other similar restrictions. One may also consider coloring edges , or other variations. Among the famous results and conjectures concerning graph coloring are the following:  Four-color theorem Strong perfect graph theorem Erdナ壮窶擢aber窶鏑ovテ。sz conjecture  Total coloring conjecture, also called Behzad's conjecture  List coloring conjecture   adwiger conjecture  Subsumption and unification Constraint modeling theories concern families of directed graphs related by a partial order. In these applications, graphs are ordered by specificity, meaning that more constrained graphs窶背hich are more specific and thus contain a greater amount of information窶蚤re subsumed by those that are more general. Operations between graphs include evaluating the direction of a subsumption relationship between two graphs, if any, and computing graph unification. The unification of two argument graphs is defined as the most general graph  the inputs, if such a graph exists; efficient unification algorithms are known.  For constraint frameworks which are strictly compositional, graph unification is the sufficient satisfiability and combination function. Well-known applications include automatic theorem proving and modeling the elaboration of linguistic structure.  Route problems  amiltonian path problem Minimum spanning tree Route inspection problem  Seven bridges of Kテカnigsberg Shortest path problem Steiner tree Three-cottage problem Traveling salesman problem  Network flow There are numerous problems arising especially from applications that have to do with various notions of flows in networks, for example:  Max flow min cut theorem Visibility problems Museum guard problem Covering problems Covering problems in graphs are specific instances of subgraph-finding problems, and they tend to be closely related to the clique problem or the independent set problem.  Set cover problem Vertex cover problem Decomposition problems Decomposition, defined as partitioning the edge set of a graph , has a wide variety of question. Often, it is required to decompose a graph into subgraphs isomorphic to a fixed graph; for instance, decomposing a complete graph into  amiltonian cycles. Other problems specify a family of graphs into which a given graph should be decomposed, for instance, a family of cycles, or decomposing a complete graph Kn into n 竏 specified trees having, respectively, , , , …, n −  edges.  Some specific decomposition problems that have been studied include:  Arboricity, a decomposition into as few forests as possible Cycle double cover, a decomposition into a collection of cycles covering each edge exactly twice Edge coloring, a decomposition into as few matchings as possible Graph factorization, a decomposition of a regular graph into regular subgraphs of given degrees Graph classes Many problems involve characterizing the members of various classes of graphs. Some examples of such questions are below:  Enumerating the members of a class Characterizing a class in terms of forbidden substructures Ascertaining relationships among classes  Finding efficient algorithms to decide membership in a class Finding representations for members of a class   