BETA This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here  GAMES #GamingSales 'Starwing Paradox' Is The Latest Mecha Game From The Studio That Brought Us 'Gundam Extreme Versus' Feb , , :pm , views  Ollie Barder Contributor    Credit Square Enix Byking are developing the upcoming mecha action arcade game 'Starwing Paradox' using Unreal Engine .  The recently announced mecha action arcade game Starwing Paradox is being developed by Byking and features character designs from none other than Yoshiyuki Sadamoto.  For fans of the Gundam Extreme Versus and Gunslinger Stratos games, you will be happy to know that Byking is back with a new mecha action arcade game called Starwing Paradox.  Using Unreal Engine , the game is already looking very nice indeed  and it reveals that the studio has definitely learned a lot from its prior though sadly failed arcade game Magician’s Dead.   Featuring mecha designs by Ippei Gyobu and Junya Ishigaki, the mecha look very contemporary and in-line with what we have recently seen in series such as Gundam: Reconguista in G.  More notably, the game also utilizes the character designing talents of Yoshiyuki Sadamoto .  Credit Square Enix Yoshiyuki Sadamoto is doing the character design for 'Starwing Paradox'.  Sadamoto is a very interesting addition here, as he rarely does games and is a very established artist in his own right. After all, it’s not every day you see the character designer for Neon Genesis Evangelion and Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water work on a new mecha game.  Set on the distant planet Meguriboshi, the game features mecha called Ae Rial that are made by the Kizana corporation. The game itself will feature  player versus, with teams of  players apiece.  As the name of the mecha implies, it looks like combat will be mostly airborne but we will get to see more of how this will work once the game is shown at this year’s JAEPO next week.  Whether Starwing Paradox will come Westward is unclear at this point but Square Enix is clearly putting a lot of effort into this, as the talent the publisher has assembled for this game is by no means trivial.  Follow me on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. I also manage Mecha Damashii and do toy reviews over at hobbylink.tv.  Read my Forbes blog here.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Ollie Barder Contributor i  Follow I cover gaming in Japan as well the pop-culture here. You can follow me on Twitter, Facebook or check out my YouTube videos. I also founded and continue to manage the mecha gaming site, Mecha Damashii. I have over a decade’s worth of games industry experience, having worked... Read More Print Website Feedback News Tip Report Corrections Reprints & Permissions  Video Player is loading.Pause Unmute : / :  Share Fullscreen RELATED TOPICS Grads of LifeVoice: More Than What's On Paper: Lifting As I Climb + views in the last  hours  Why Amazon And Walmart Are Battling To Take Over India's Flipkart + views in the last  hours  iPad  Review: Why Would Anyone Need The iPad Pro . Now? 