Geometry From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Geometry . Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane. Outline  istory Branches Concepts Features  Zero / One-dimensional Two-dimensional Three-dimensional Four- / other-dimensional Geometers by name by period v t e  An illustration of Desargues' theorem, an important result in Euclidean and projective geometry Geometry  is a branch of mathematics concerned with questions of shape, size, relative position of figures, and the properties of space. A mathematician who works in the field of geometry is called a geometer.  Geometry arose independently in a number of early cultures as a practical way for dealing with lengths, areas, and volumes. Geometry began to see elements of formal mathematical science emerging in the West as early as the th century BC.  While geometry has evolved significantly throughout the years, there are some general concepts that are more or less fundamental to geometry. These include the concepts of points, lines, planes, surfaces, angles, and curves, as well as the more advanced notions of manifolds and topology or metric.  Geometry has applications to many fields, including art, architecture, physics, as well as to other branches of mathematics.  Contents 	Overview 	 istory 	Important concepts in geometry .	Axioms .	Points .	Lines .	Planes .	Angles .	Curves .	Surfaces .	Manifolds .	Topologies and metrics .	Compass and straightedge constructions .	Dimension .	Symmetry .	Non-Euclidean geometry 	Contemporary geometry .	Euclidean geometry .	Differential geometry .	Topology and geometry .	Algebraic geometry 	Applications .	Art .	Architecture .	Physics .	Other fields of mathematics 	See also .	Lists .	Related topics .	Other fields 	Notes 	Sources 	Further reading 	External links Overview Contemporary geometry has many subfields:  Euclidean geometry is geometry in its classical sense. The mandatory educational curriculum of the majority of nations includes the study of points, lines, planes, angles, triangles, congruence, similarity, solid figures, circles, and analytic geometry. Euclidean geometry also has applications in computer science, crystallography, and various branches of modern mathematics. Differential geometry uses techniques of calculus and linear algebra to study problems in geometry. It has applications in physics, including in general relativity. Topology is the field concerned with the properties of geometric objects that are unchanged by continuous mappings. In practice, this often means dealing with large-scale properties of spaces, such as connectedness and compactness. Convex geometry investigates convex shapes in the Euclidean space and its more abstract analogues, often using techniques of real analysis. It has close connections to convex analysis, optimization and functional analysis and important applications in number theory. Algebraic geometry studies geometry through the use of multivariate polynomials and other algebraic techniques. It has applications in many areas, including cryptography and string theory. Discrete geometry is concerned mainly with questions of relative position of simple geometric objects, such as points, lines and circles. It shares many methods and principles with combinatorics.  istory Main article:  istory of geometry  A European and an Arab practicing geometry in the th century. The earliest recorded beginnings of geometry can be traced to ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt in the nd millennium BC.  In the th century BC, the Greek mathematician Thales of Miletus used geometry to solve problems such as calculating the height of pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore.  e is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales' Theorem.  e also studied the spiral bearing his name and obtained formulas for the volumes of surfaces of revolution.   Woman teaching geometry. Illustration at the beginning of a medieval translation of Euclid's Elements,  Indian mathematicians also made many important contributions in geometry. The Satapatha Brahmana  contains rules for ritual geometric constructions that are similar to the Sulba Sutras.  In the Middle Ages, mathematics in medieval Islam contributed to the development of geometry, especially algebraic geometry.  In the early th century, there were two important developments in geometry. The first was the creation of analytic geometry, or geometry with coordinates and equations, by Ren辿 Descartes . Projective geometry is a geometry without measurement or parallel lines, just the study of how points are related to each other.  Two developments in geometry in the th century changed the way it had been studied previously. These were the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky, J叩nos Bolyai and Carl Friedrich Gauss and of the formulation of symmetry as the central consideration in the Erlangen Programme of Felix Klein , working primarily with tools from mathematical analysis, and introducing the Riemann surface, and  enri Poincar辿, the founder of algebraic topology and the geometric theory of dynamical systems. As a consequence of these major changes in the conception of geometry, the concept of "space" became something rich and varied, and the natural background for theories as different as complex analysis and classical mechanics.  Important concepts in geometry The following are some of the most important concepts in geometry.  Axioms  An illustration of Euclid's parallel postulate See also: Euclidean geometry Euclid took an abstract approach to geometry in his Elements, one of the most influential books ever written. Euclid introduced certain axioms, or postulates, expressing primary or self-evident properties of points, lines, and planes.  e proceeded to rigorously deduce other properties by mathematical reasoning. The characteristic feature of Euclid's approach to geometry was its rigor, and it has come to be known as axiomatic or synthetic geometry. At the start of the th century, the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky  employed axiomatic reasoning in an attempt to provide a modern foundation of geometry.  Points Main article: Point  Points are considered fundamental objects in Euclidean geometry. They have been defined in a variety of ways, including Euclid's definition as 'that which has no part'  Lines Main article: Line  Euclid described a line as "breadthless length" which "lies equally with respect to the points on itself".  Planes Main article: Plane  A plane is a flat, two-dimensional surface that extends infinitely far. and so on.  Angles Main article: Angle Euclid defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two lines which meet each other, and do not lie straight with respect to each other.   Acute  angles. The acute and obtuse angles are also known as oblique angles. In Euclidean geometry, angles are used to study polygons and triangles, as well as forming an object of study in their own right.  In differential geometry and calculus, the angles between plane curves or space curves or surfaces can be calculated using the derivative.  Curves Main article: Curve  A curve is a -dimensional object that may be straight  or not; curves in -dimensional space are called plane curves and those in -dimensional space are called space curves.  In topology, a curve is defined by a function from an interval of the real numbers to another space.  Surfaces Main article: Surface   A sphere is a surface that can be defined parametrically  A surface is a two-dimensional object, such as a sphere or paraboloid.  Manifolds Main article: Manifold A manifold is a generalization of the concepts of curve and surface. In topology, a manifold is a topological space where every point has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to Euclidean space.  Manifolds are used extensively in physics, including in general relativity and string theory  Topologies and metrics Main article: Topology  Visual checking of the Pythagorean theorem for the  triangle as in the Zhoubi Suanjing – BC. The Pythagorean theorem is a consequence of the Euclidean metric. A topology is a mathematical structure on a set that tells how elements of the set relate spatially to each other.  Compass and straightedge constructions Main article: Compass and straightedge constructions Classical geometers paid special attention to constructing geometric objects that had been described in some other way. Classically, the only instruments allowed in geometric constructions are the compass and straightedge. Also, every construction had to be complete in a finite number of steps.  owever, some problems turned out to be difficult or impossible to solve by these means alone, and ingenious constructions using parabolas and other curves, as well as mechanical devices, were found.  Dimension Main article: Dimension  The Koch snowflake, with fractal dimension=log/log and topological dimension= Where the traditional geometry allowed dimensions   rather than anything a priori.  The issue of dimension still matters to geometry, in the absence of complete answers to classic questions. Dimensions  of space and  of space-time are special cases in geometric topology. Dimension  or  is a key number in string theory. Research may bring a satisfactory geometric reason for the significance of  and  dimensions.  Symmetry Main article: Symmetry  A tiling of the hyperbolic plane The theme of symmetry in geometry is nearly as old as the science of geometry itself. Symmetric shapes such as the circle, regular polygons and platonic solids held deep significance for many ancient philosophers and were investigated in detail before the time of Euclid. Symmetric patterns occur in nature and were artistically rendered in a multitude of forms, including the graphics of M. C. Escher. Nonetheless, it was not until the second half of th century that the unifying role of symmetry in foundations of geometry was recognized. Felix Klein's Erlangen program proclaimed that, in a very precise sense, symmetry, expressed via the notion of a transformation group, determines what geometry is. Symmetry in classical Euclidean geometry is represented by congruences and rigid motions, whereas in projective geometry an analogous role is played by collineations, geometric transformations that take straight lines into straight lines.  owever it was in the new geometries of Bolyai and Lobachevsky, Riemann, Clifford and Klein, and Sophus Lie that Klein's idea to 'define a geometry via its symmetry group' proved most influential. Both discrete and continuous symmetries play prominent roles in geometry, the former in topology and geometric group theory, the latter in Lie theory and Riemannian geometry.  A different type of symmetry is the principle of duality in projective geometry  among other fields. This meta-phenomenon can roughly be described as follows: in any theorem, exchange point with plane, join with meet, lies in with contains, and you will get an equally true theorem. A similar and closely related form of duality exists between a vector space and its dual space.  Non-Euclidean geometry  Differential geometry uses tools from calculus to study problems involving curvature. In the nearly two thousand years since Euclid, while the range of geometrical questions asked and answered inevitably expanded, the basic understanding of space remained essentially the same. Immanuel Kant argued that there is only one, absolute, geometry, which is known to be true a priori by an inner faculty of mind: Euclidean geometry was synthetic a priori. published only after his death. Riemann's new idea of space proved crucial in Einstein's general relativity theory, and Riemannian geometry, that considers very general spaces in which the notion of length is defined, is a mainstay of modern geometry.  Contemporary geometry Euclidean geometry  Geometry lessons in the th century Euclidean geometry has become closely connected with computational geometry, computer graphics, convex geometry, incidence geometry, finite geometry, discrete geometry, and some areas of combinatorics. Attention was given to further work on Euclidean geometry and the Euclidean groups by crystallography and the work of  . S. M. Coxeter, and can be seen in theories of Coxeter groups and polytopes. Geometric group theory is an expanding area of the theory of more general discrete groups, drawing on geometric models and algebraic techniques.  Differential geometry Differential geometry has been of increasing importance to mathematical physics due to Einstein's general relativity postulation that the universe is curved. Contemporary differential geometry is intrinsic, meaning that the spaces it considers are smooth manifolds whose geometric structure is governed by a Riemannian metric, which determines how distances are measured near each point, and not a priori parts of some ambient flat Euclidean space.  Topology and geometry  A thickening of the trefoil knot The field of topology, which saw massive development in the th century, is in a technical sense a type of transformation geometry, in which transformations are homeomorphisms. This has often been expressed in the form of the dictum 'topology is rubber-sheet geometry'. Contemporary geometric topology and differential topology, and particular subfields such as Morse theory, would be counted by most mathematicians as part of geometry. Algebraic topology and general topology have gone their own ways.  Algebraic geometry  Quintic Calabi–Yau threefold The field of algebraic geometry is the modern incarnation of the Cartesian geometry of co-ordinates. From late s through mid-s it had undergone major foundational development, largely due to work of Jean-Pierre Serre and Alexander Grothendieck. This led to the introduction of schemes and greater emphasis on topological methods, including various cohomology theories. One of seven Millennium Prize problems, the  odge conjecture, is a question in algebraic geometry.  The study of low-dimensional algebraic varieties, algebraic curves, algebraic surfaces and algebraic varieties of dimension  , has been far advanced. Gröbner basis theory and real algebraic geometry are among more applied subfields of modern algebraic geometry. Arithmetic geometry is an active field combining algebraic geometry and number theory. Other directions of research involve moduli spaces and complex geometry. Algebro-geometric methods are commonly applied in string and brane theory.  Applications Geometry has found applications in many fields, some of which are described below.  Art Main article: Mathematics and art Mathematics and art are related in a variety of ways. For instance, the theory of perspective showed that there is more to geometry than just the metric properties of figures: perspective is the origin of projective geometry.  Architecture Main articles: Mathematics and architecture and Architectural geometry Mathematics and architecture are related, since, as with other arts, architects use mathematics for several reasons. Apart from the mathematics needed when engineering buildings, architects use geometry: to define the spatial form of a building; from the Pythagoreans of the sixth century BC onwards, to create forms considered harmonious, and thus to lay out buildings and their surroundings according to mathematical, aesthetic and sometimes religious principles; to decorate buildings with mathematical objects such as tessellations; and to meet environmental goals, such as to minimise wind speeds around the bases of tall buildings.  Physics Main article: Mathematical physics  The polytope, orthogonally projected into the E Lie group Coxeter plane. Lie groups have several applications in physics. The field of astronomy, especially as it relates to mapping the positions of stars and planets on the celestial sphere and describing the relationship between movements of celestial bodies, have served as an important source of geometric problems throughout history.  Modern geometry has many ties to physics as is exemplified by the links between pseudo-Riemannian geometry and general relativity. One of the youngest physical theories, string theory, is also very geometric in flavour.  Other fields of mathematics Geometry has also had a large effect on other areas of mathematics. For instance, the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes and the concurrent developments of algebra marked a new stage for geometry, since geometric figures such as plane curves could now be represented analytically in the form of functions and equations. This played a key role in the emergence of infinitesimal calculus in the th century. The subject of geometry was further enriched by the study of the intrinsic structure of geometric objects that originated with Euler and Gauss and led to the creation of topology and differential geometry.   The Pythagoreans discovered that the sides of a triangle could have incommensurable lengths. An important area of application is number theory. In ancient Greece the Pythagoreans considered the role of numbers in geometry.  owever, the discovery of incommensurable lengths, which contradicted their philosophical views, made them abandon abstract numbers in favor of concrete geometric quantities, such as length and area of figures. Since the th century, geometry has been used for solving problems in number theory, for example through the geometry of numbers or, more recently, scheme theory, which is used in Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.  While the visual nature of geometry makes it initially more accessible than other mathematical areas such as algebra or number theory, geometric language is also used in contexts far removed from its traditional, Euclidean provenance .  Analytic geometry applies methods of algebra to geometric questions, typically by relating geometric curves to algebraic equations. These ideas played a key role in the development of calculus in the th century and led to the discovery of many new properties of plane curves. Modern algebraic geometry considers similar questions on a vastly more abstract level.  Leonhard Euler, in studying problems like the Seven Bridges of Königsberg, considered the most fundamental properties of geometric figures based solely on shape, independent of their metric properties. Euler called this new branch of geometry geometria situs , but it is now known as topology. Topology grew out of geometry, but turned into a large independent discipline. It does not differentiate between objects that can be continuously deformed into each other. The objects may nevertheless retain some geometry, as in the case of hyperbolic knots.   