Number theory From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Numerology.  A Lehmer sieve, which is a primitive digital computer once used for finding primes and solving simple Diophantine equations. Number theory, or in older usage arithmetic, is a branch of pure mathematics devoted primarily to the study of the integers. It is sometimes called "The Queen of Mathematics" because of its foundational place in the discipline. Number theorists study prime numbers as well as the properties of objects made out of integers .  Integers can be considered either in themselves or as solutions to equations .  The older term for number theory is arithmetic. By the early twentieth century, it had been superseded by "number theory". In particular, arithmetical is preferred as an adjective to number-theoretic.  Contents 	 istory .	Origins ..	Dawn of arithmetic ..	Classical Greece and the early  ellenistic period ..	Diophantus ..	Āryabhaṭa, Brahmagupta, Bhāskara ..	Arithmetic in the Islamic golden age ..	Western Europe in the Middle Ages .	Early modern number theory ..	Fermat ..	Euler ..	Lagrange, Legendre, and Gauss .	Maturity and division into subfields 	Main subdivisions .	Elementary tools .	Analytic number theory .	Algebraic number theory .	Diophantine geometry 	Recent approaches and subfields .	Probabilistic number theory .	Arithmetic combinatorics .	Computations in number theory 	Applications 	Prizes 	See also 	Notes 	References 	Sources 	Further reading 	External links  istory Origins Dawn of arithmetic The first historical find of an arithmetical nature is a fragment of a table: the broken clay tablet Plimpton   contains a list of "Pythagorean triples", i.e., integers . The triples are too many and too large to have been obtained by brute force. The heading over the first column reads: "The takiltum of the diagonal which has been subtracted such that the width..."   The Plimpton  tablet The table's layout suggests that it was constructed by means of what amounts, in modern language, to the identity   which is implicit in routine Old Babylonian exercises. the triples were first constructed and then reordered by  c/a, presumably for actual use as a "table", i.e., with a view to applications.  It is not known what these applications may have been, or whether there could have been any; Babylonian astronomy, for example, truly came into its own only later. It has been suggested instead that the table was a source of numerical examples for school problems.  While Babylonian number theory—or what survives of Babylonian mathematics that can be called thus—consists of this single, striking fragment, Babylonian algebra  was exceptionally well developed. state that Thales and Pythagoras traveled and studied in Egypt.  Euclid IX — is very probably Pythagorean; This forced a distinction between numbers , on the other hand.  The Pythagorean tradition spoke also of so-called polygonal or figurate numbers. While square numbers, cubic numbers, etc., are seen now as more natural than triangular numbers, pentagonal numbers, etc., the study of the sums of triangular and pentagonal numbers would prove fruitful in the early modern period .  We know of no clearly arithmetical material in ancient Egyptian or Vedic sources, though there is some algebra in both. The Chinese remainder theorem appears as an exercise  it is the problem that was later solved by Āryabhaṭa's Kuṭṭaka – see below.)  There is also some numerical mysticism in Chinese mathematics, but, unlike that of the Pythagoreans, it seems to have led nowhere. Like the Pythagoreans' perfect numbers, magic squares have passed from superstition into recreation.  Classical Greece and the early  ellenistic period Further information: Ancient Greek mathematics Aside from a few fragments, the mathematics of Classical Greece is known to us either through the reports of contemporary non-mathematicians or through mathematical works from the early  ellenistic period. In the case of number theory, this means, by and large, Plato and Euclid, respectively.  While Asian mathematics influenced Greek and  ellenistic learning, it seems to be the case that Greek mathematics is also an indigenous tradition.  Eusebius, PE X, chapter  mentions of Pythagoras:  "In fact the said Pythagoras, while busily studying the wisdom of each nation, visited Babylon, and Egypt, and all Persia, being instructed by the Magi and the priests: and in addition to these he is related to have studied under the Brahmans ; and from some he gathered astrology, from others geometry, and arithmetic and music from others, and different things from different nations, and only from the wise men of Greece did he get nothing, wedded as they were to a poverty and dearth of wisdom: so on the contrary he himself became the author of instruction to the Greeks in the learning which he had procured from abroad."  Aristotle claimed that the philosophy of Plato closely followed the teachings of the Pythagoreans,  Plato had a keen interest in mathematics, and distinguished clearly between arithmetic and calculation.   Euclid devoted part of his Elements to prime numbers and divisibility, topics that belong unambiguously to number theory and are basic to it .  In , Lessing published an epigram he had found in a manuscript during his work as a librarian; it claimed to be a letter sent by Archimedes to Eratosthenes. The epigram proposed what has become known as Archimedes's cattle problem; its solution . As far as we know, such equations were first successfully treated by the Indian school. It is not known whether Archimedes himself had a method of solution.  Diophantus  Title page of the  edition of Diophantus's Arithmetica, translated into Latin by Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac. Very little is known about Diophantus of Alexandria; he probably lived in the third century CE, that is, about five hundred years after Euclid. Six out of the thirteen books of Diophantus's Arithmetica survive in the original Greek; four more books survive in an Arabic translation. The Arithmetica is a collection of worked-out problems where the task is invariably to find rational solutions to a system of polynomial equations, usually of the form . Thus, nowadays, we speak of Diophantine equations when we speak of polynomial equations to which rational or integer solutions must be found.  One may say that Diophantus was studying rational points — i.e., points whose coordinates are rational — on curves and algebraic varieties; however, unlike the Greeks of the Classical period, who did what we would now call basic algebra in geometrical terms, Diophantus did what we would now call basic algebraic geometry in purely algebraic terms. In modern language, what Diophantus did was to find rational parametrizations of varieties; that is, given an equation of the form =.  Diophantus also studied the equations of some non-rational curves, for which no rational parametrisation is possible.  e managed to find some rational points on these curves   While Diophantus was concerned largely with rational solutions, he assumed some results on integer numbers, in particular that every integer is the sum of four squares .  Āryabhaṭa, Brahmagupta, Bhāskara While Greek astronomy probably influenced Indian learning, to the point of introducing trigonometry,  Āryabhaṭa  showed that pairs of simultaneous congruences  could be solved by a method he called kuṭṭaka, or pulveriser;  Brahmagupta .  Indian mathematics remained largely unknown in Europe until the late eighteenth century;  Arithmetic in the Islamic golden age Further information: Mathematics in medieval Islam  Al- aytham seen by the West: frontispice of Selenographia, showing Alhasen  representing knowledge through reason, and Galileo representing knowledge through the senses. In the early ninth century, the caliph Al-Ma'mun ordered translations of many Greek mathematical works and at least one Sanskrit work (the Sindhind, which may  what would later be called Wilson's theorem.  Western Europe in the Middle Ages Other than a treatise on squares in arithmetic progression by Fibonacci — who lived and studied in north Africa and Constantinople during his formative years, ca. – — no number theory to speak of was done in western Europe during the Middle Ages. Matters started to change in Europe in the late Renaissance, thanks to a renewed study of the works of Greek antiquity. A catalyst was the textual emendation and translation into Latin of Diophantus's Arithmetica .  Early modern number theory Fermat  Pierre de Fermat Pierre de Fermat  never published his writings; in particular, his work on number theory is contained almost entirely in letters to mathematicians and in private marginal notes.  e did make repeated use of mathematical induction, introducing the method of infinite descent.  One of Fermat's first interests was perfect numbers .  Fermat's achievements in arithmetic include:  Fermat's little theorem , If a and b are coprime, then  a^ + b^ is not divisible by any prime congruent to − modulo ; on other quadratic forms. Fermat posed the problem of solving = as a challenge to English mathematicians .  e states that a proof can be found by descent. Fermat developed methods for  finding points on curves of genus  and . As in Diophantus, there are many special procedures and what amounts to a tangent construction, but no use of a secant construction. Fermat states and proves  Fermat's claim  to have shown there are no solutions to  n\geq  appears only in his annotations on the margin of his copy of Diophantus.  Euler  Leonhard Euler The interest of Leonhard Euler  in number theory was first spurred in , when a friend of his, the amateur  Proofs for Fermat's statements. This includes Fermat's little theorem . Pell's equation, first misnamed by Euler. First steps towards analytic number theory. In his work of sums of four squares, partitions, pentagonal numbers, and the distribution of prime numbers, Euler pioneered the use of what can be seen as analysis  early work on what would later be called the Riemann zeta function. Quadratic forms. Following Fermat's lead, Euler did further research on the question of which primes can be expressed in the form , some of it prefiguring quadratic reciprocity. Diophantine equations. Euler worked on some Diophantine equations of genus  and . whose study he had himself initiated. Lagrange, Legendre, and Gauss  Carl Friedrich Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, first edition Joseph-Louis Lagrange  — defining their equivalence relation, showing how to put them in reduced form, etc.  Adrien-Marie Legendre  was the first to state the law of quadratic reciprocity.  e also conjectured what amounts to the prime number theorem and Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions.  e gave a full treatment of the equation =   Carl Friedrich Gauss In his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae  and devoted a section to computational matters, including primality tests. The last section of the Disquisitiones established a link between roots of unity and number theory:  The theory of the division of the circle...which is treated in sec.  does not belong by itself to arithmetic, but its principles can only be drawn from higher arithmetic.  In this way, Gauss arguably made a first foray towards both Évariste Galois's work and algebraic number theory.  Maturity and division into subfields  Ernst Kummer  Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet Starting early in the nineteenth century, the following developments gradually took place:  The rise to self-consciousness of number theory  as a field of study. The development of much of modern mathematics necessary for basic modern number theory: complex analysis, group theory, Galois theory—accompanied by greater rigor in analysis and abstraction in algebra. The rough subdivision of number theory into its modern subfields—in particular, analytic and algebraic number theory. Algebraic number theory may be said to start with the study of reciprocity and cyclotomy, but truly came into its own with the development of abstract algebra and early ideal theory and valuation theory; see below. A conventional starting point for analytic number theory is Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions ,  The history of each subfield is briefly addressed in its own section below; see the main article of each subfield for fuller treatments. Many of the most interesting questions in each area remain open and are being actively worked on.  Main subdivisions Elementary tools The term elementary generally denotes a method that does not use complex analysis. For example, the prime number theorem was first proven using complex analysis in , but an elementary proof was found only in  by Erdős and Selberg. The term is somewhat ambiguous: for example, proofs based on complex Tauberian theorems  are often seen as quite enlightening but not elementary, in spite of using Fourier analysis, rather than complex analysis as such.  ere as elsewhere, an elementary proof may be longer and more difficult for most readers than a non-elementary one.  Number theory has the reputation of being a field many of whose results can be stated to the layperson. At the same time, the proofs of these results are not particularly accessible, in part because the range of tools they use is, if anything, unusually broad within mathematics.  Analytic number theory Main article: Analytic number theory  Riemann zeta function ζ: dark colors denote values close to zero and hue gives the value's argument.  The action of the modular group on the upper half plane. The region in grey is the standard fundamental domain. Analytic number theory may be defined  in terms of its tools, as the study of the integers by means of tools from real and complex analysis; or in terms of its concerns, as the study within number theory of estimates on size and density, as opposed to identities. Some subjects generally considered to be part of analytic number theory, e.g., sieve theory, yet it does belong to analytic number theory.  The following are examples of problems in analytic number theory: the prime number theorem, the Goldbach conjecture  also occupies an increasingly central place in the toolbox of analytic number theory.  One may ask analytic questions about algebraic numbers, and use analytic means to answer such questions; it is thus that algebraic and analytic number theory intersect. For example, one may define prime ideals  and ask how many prime ideals there are up to a certain size. This question can be answered by means of an examination of Dedekind zeta functions, which are generalizations of the Riemann zeta function, a key analytic object at the roots of the subject.  Algebraic number theory Main article: Algebraic number theory An algebraic number is any complex number that is a solution to some polynomial equation +=  is an algebraic number. Fields of algebraic numbers are also called algebraic number fields, or shortly number fields. Algebraic number theory studies algebraic number fields. Thus, analytic and algebraic number theory can and do overlap: the former is defined by its methods, the latter by its objects of study.  It could be argued that the simplest kind of number fields  For that matter, the th-century chakravala method amounts—in modern terms—to an algorithm for finding the units of a real quadratic number field.  owever, neither Bhāskara nor Gauss knew of number fields as such.  The grounds of the subject as we know it were set in the late nineteenth century, when ideal numbers, the theory of ideals and valuation theory were developed; these are three complementary ways of dealing with the lack of unique factorisation in algebraic number fields.  seems to have come from the study of higher reciprocity laws,i.e., generalisations of quadratic reciprocity.  Number fields are often studied as extensions of smaller number fields: a field L is said to be an extension of a field K if L contains K.  and carried out largely in —.  An example of an active area of research in algebraic number theory is Iwasawa theory. The Langlands program, one of the main current large-scale research plans in mathematics, is sometimes described as an attempt to generalise class field theory to non-abelian extensions of number fields.  Diophantine geometry Main article: Diophantine geometry The central problem of Diophantine geometry is to determine when a Diophantine equation has solutions, and if it does, how many. The approach taken is to think of the solutions of an equation as a geometric object.  For example, an equation in two variables defines a curve in the plane. More generally, an equation, or system of equations, in two or more variables defines a curve, a surface or some other such object in n-dimensional space. In Diophantine geometry, one asks whether there are any rational points ? What about integer points?  An example here may be helpful. Consider the Pythagorean equation  x^ + y^ = .    Two examples of an elliptic curve, i.e., a curve of genus  having at least one rational point.  The rephrasing of questions on equations in terms of points on curves turns out to be felicitous. The finiteness or not of the number of rational or integer points on an algebraic curve—that is, rational or integer solutions to an equation  f=. Other geometrical notions turn out to be just as crucial.  There is also the closely linked area of Diophantine approximations: given a number  x cannot be well approximated, then some equations do not have integer or rational solutions. Moreover, several concepts  turn out to be crucial both in Diophantine geometry and in the study of Diophantine approximations. This question is also of special interest in transcendental number theory: if a number can be better approximated than any algebraic number, then it is a transcendental number. It is by this argument that π and e have been shown to be transcendental.  Diophantine geometry should not be confused with the geometry of numbers, which is a collection of graphical methods for answering certain questions in algebraic number theory. Arithmetic geometry, on the other hand, is a contemporary term for much the same domain as that covered by the term Diophantine geometry. The term arithmetic geometry is arguably used most often when one wishes to emphasise the connections to modern algebraic geometry  rather than to techniques in Diophantine approximations.  Recent approaches and subfields The areas below date as such from no earlier than the mid-twentieth century, even if they are based on older material. For example, as is explained below, the matter of algorithms in number theory is very old, in some sense older than the concept of proof; at the same time, the modern study of computability dates only from the s and s, and computational complexity theory from the s.  Probabilistic number theory Main article: Probabilistic number theory Take a number at random between one and a million.  ow likely is it to be prime? This is just another way of asking how many primes there are between one and a million. Further: how many prime divisors will it have, on average?  ow many divisors will it have altogether, and with what likelihood? What is the probability that it will have many more or many fewer divisors or prime divisors than the average?  Much of probabilistic number theory can be seen as an important special case of the study of variables that are almost, but not quite, mutually independent. For example, the event that a random integer between one and a million be divisible by two and the event that it be divisible by three are almost independent, but not quite.  It is sometimes said that probabilistic combinatorics uses the fact that whatever happens with probability greater than  must happen sometimes; one may say with equal justice that many applications of probabilistic number theory hinge on the fact that whatever is unusual must be rare. If certain algebraic objects  can be shown to be in the tail of certain sensibly defined distributions, it follows that there must be few of them; this is a very concrete non-probabilistic statement following from a probabilistic one.  At times, a non-rigorous, probabilistic approach leads to a number of heuristic algorithms and open problems, notably Cramér's conjecture.  Arithmetic combinatorics Main articles: Arithmetic combinatorics and Additive number theory Let A be a set of N integers. Consider the set A + A =  consisting of all sums of two elements of A. Is A + A much larger than A? Barely larger? If A + A is barely larger than A, must A have plenty of arithmetic structure, for example, does A resemble an arithmetic progression?  If we begin from a fairly "thick" infinite set  A?  These questions are characteristic of arithmetic combinatorics. This is a presently coalescing field; it subsumes additive number theory (which concerns itself with certain very specific sets  A may be compared.  Computations in number theory Main article: Computational number theory While the word algorithm goes back only to certain readers of al-Khwārizmī, careful descriptions of methods of solution are older than proofs: such methods , without a proof of correctness.  There are two main questions: "can we compute this?" and "can we compute it rapidly?". Anyone can test whether a number is prime or, if it is not, split it into prime factors; doing so rapidly is another matter. We now know fast algorithms for testing primality, but, in spite of much work , no truly fast algorithm for factoring.  The difficulty of a computation can be useful: modern protocols for encrypting messages  would take one too long a time to figure out on one's own. For example, these functions can be such that their inverses can be computed only if certain large integers are factorized. While many difficult computational problems outside number theory are known, most working encryption protocols nowadays are based on the difficulty of a few number-theoretical problems.  On a different note — some things may not be computable at all; in fact, this can be proven in some instances. For instance, in , it was proven, as a solution to  ilbert's th problem, that there is no Turing machine which can solve all Diophantine equations. In particular, this means that, given a computably enumerable set of axioms, there are Diophantine equations for which there is no proof, starting from the axioms, of whether the set of equations has or does not have integer solutions.    