Mobile Suit Gundam From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the  anime. For the series that it spawned, see Gundam.  This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  Mobile Suit Gundam Cover of the first Anime Legends English DVD box compilation, featuring the protagonist Amuro Ray and the titular RX-- Gundam. 機動戦士ガンダム  Genre	Military science fiction, Mecha Anime television series Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino Produced by	Yasuo Shibue Hobuyuki Okuma Wataru Sekioka Written by	Hajime Yatate Music by	Takeo Watanabe Yūshi Matsuyama Studio	Nippon Sunrise Licensed by AUS Madman Entertainment NA Sunrise UK Anime Limited Original network	Nagoya Broadcasting Network, Animax English network US Cartoon Network  Original run	April ,  – January ,  Episodes	  Manga Written by	Yoshiyuki Tomino Illustrated by	Yoshikazu Yasuhiko Published by	Akita Shoten Demographic	Shōnen Original run	 –  Volumes	 Anime film series Directed by	Yoshiyuki Tomino Produced by	Masami Iwasaki Masuo Ueda Takayuki Yoshii Written by	Hajime Yatate Music by	Joe Hisaishi Takeo Watanabe Studio	Nippon Sunrise Licensed by NA Sunrise Released	March ,  – March ,  Runtime	 minutes   minutes   minutes  Films	 Mobile Suit Gundam  is a televised anime series, produced and animated by Sunrise. Created and directed by Yoshiyuki Tomino, it premiered in Japan on Nagoya Broadcasting Network and its affiliated ANN stations on April , , and lasted until January , , spanning  episodes. It was the very first Gundam series, which has subsequently been adapted into numerous sequels and spin-offs. Set in the futuristic calendar year "Universal Century" , the plot focuses on the war between the Principality of Zeon and the Earth Federation, with the latter unveiling a new giant robot known as the RX-- Gundam piloted by the teenage civilian mechanic Amuro Ray.  In , the series was re-edited for theatrical release and split into three movies. The characters were designed by Yoshikazu Yasuhiko, and Kunio Okawara was responsible for the mechanical designs, including the eponymous giant robot, the RX-- Gundam. The first movie was released on February , . Tomino himself also wrote a trilogy of novels that retell the events of the series. Two manga adaptations of the series have also been written by two manga artists.  Despite initial low ratings that caused the series' cancellation, the popularity of Gundam saw a boost from the introduction of Bandai's Gunpla models in  and from reruns and the theatrical release of the anime, leading to the creation of a prolific and lucrative media and toy franchise. The series is famous for revolutionizing the giant robot genre due to the handling of mobile suits as weapons of war as well as the portrayal of their pilots as ordinary soldiers, as opposed to the previous style of portraying hero pilots and their giant super hero robots.  Contents 	Plot 	Production 	Media .	Anime .	Novel .	Compilation movies .	Manga .	Video games 	Reception .	Background research .	Gundam-themed rides 	See also 	References 	External links Plot See also: List of Mobile Suit Gundam characters Set in a fictional universe in the year  , the Principality of Zeon has declared independence from the Earth Federation, and subsequently launched a war of independence called the One Year War. The conflict has directly affected every continent on Earth, also nearly every space colony and lunar settlement. Zeon, though smaller, has the tactical upper hand through their use of a new type of humanoid weapons called mobile suits. After half of all humanity perishes in the conflict, the war settled into a bitter stalemate lasting over  months.  The story begins with a newly deployed Federation warship, the White Base, arriving at the secret research base located at the Side  colony to pick up the Federation's newest weapon. However, they are closely followed by Zeon forces. A Zeon reconnaissance team member disobeys mission orders and attacks the colony, killing most of the Federation crew and civilians in the process. Out of desperation, citizen boy Amuro Ray accidentally finds the Federation's new prototype arsenal—the RX- Gundam, and neutralizes the situation. Scrambling everything they can, the White Base sets out with her newly formed crew of civilian recruits and refugees in her journey to survive.  On their journey, the White Base members often encounter the Zeon Lieutenant Commander Char Aznable. Although Char antagonizes Amuro in battle, he takes advantage of their position as Federation members to have them kill members from Zeon's Zabi family as part of his revenge scheme. Amuro also meets ensign Lalah Sune with whom he falls in love, but accidentally kills when facing Char. When the Federation Forces invade the Fortress of A Baoa Qu to defeat the Zeon forces, Amuro engages on a final one-on-one duel against Char due to their shared hatred for Lalah's death. Having realized he forgot his true enemy, Char stops fighting to kill the last surviving Zabi member, Kycilia Zabi. Amuro then reunites with his comrades as the war reaches its end.  Production  Director Yoshiyuki Tomino used the series to tell a story about war. The "Mobile Suits" of the show were inspired by the powered armor from the American novel Starship Troopers from .  In previous series Tomino worked in, villains were alien agents. Mobile Suit Gundam was the first of his work which featured humans as antagonists. The director commented he wanted to tell a story about war.  Tomino met mechanical designer Kunio Okawara when he first worked in two television series from Sunrise. Tomino liked Okawara's work and asked him to collaborate with him in his upcoming project. Originally, the anime would be called "Gunboy" but it was renamed Mobile Suit Gundam.  Tomino compares the machines with religious history in Japan, most notably the worship of Buddha statues located in temples. The relationship between the pilot and the mobile suit has also been compared with the Formula One drivers who rely on machines to achieve a goal.  Media Anime In February , Mobile Suit Gundam was aired in Italy, the first country to broadcast the show outside Japan. Mobile Suit Gundam was also later aired by the anime satellite television network, Animax, across Japan, with the series continuing to be aired on the network currently, and later its respective networks worldwide, including Hong Kong, Southeast Asia, South Asia, and other regions.  Hoping to capitalize on the success of Gundam Wing from the previous year, Bandai Entertainment released a heavily edited and English-dubbed version of Mobile Suit Gundam, premiering on Cartoon Network's Toonami block across the United States on Monday, July , . The series did not do as well as Wing but the ratings were high enough for the whole series to be aired and to spawn an enormous toy line. Due to the September th attacks, Cartoon Network, like many other American TV stations, began pulling, and editing, war-themed content and violent programming, resulting in the cancellation of the series. However, the series finale was shown as part of Toonami's "New Year's Eve-il" special on December ,  and the unaired episodes were aired in reruns during .  On Saturday, June , , the series was given another chance by Cartoon Network on their late-night Adult Swim block, but it was again pulled before completing its run because of low ratings.  On May , , Bandai Entertainment re-released the English dub of the TV series in a  volume DVD set.  At the  New York Comic Con/New York Anime Festival, Bandai Entertainment announced that they would re-release Mobile Suit Gundam with both the original Japanese audio and the English dub. Only one episode out of the  episode will not be dubbed, at the request of Yoshiyuki Tomino. Bandai released Gundam in two sets in the summer of .  Following the closure in  of Bandai Entertainment, the series has been out of print. At their New York Comic-Con  panel, Sunrise announced their plans to re-release all of the Gundam series on home video in North America, starting with the original series. They will be distributed via Right Stuf Inc..  On July , , UK anime distributor Anime Limited announced they will release Mobile Suit Gundam in cooperation with Sunrise for the first time in the UK on DVD and Blu-ray.  In both American TV showings and on the international DVD and Blu-ray release, episode   was cut out. According to Yoshiyuki Tomino, the removal was made at his request, with the episode becoming a "lost episode" of sorts, never being dubbed. The episode remained on the Japanese DVD and Blu-ray releases.  Novel In , before the end of the anime, Yoshiyuki Tomino himself created the first novelizations of the original Gundam anime series. The novels, issued as a series of three books, allowed him to depict his story in a more sophisticated, adult, and detailed fashion. Along with this adaptation came several major changes to the story. For example, Amuro is already a member of the Federation military at the time of the initial Zeon attack on Side , and the main characters in the Federation serve on the White Base-class ships Pegasus and Pegasus II rather than the Pegasus-class White Base. Additionally, the war continues well into the year UC  in the novels, whereas it concludes at the beginning of that year in the anime series. In the novel Amuro Ray is killed in the final attack against the Zeonic stronghold of A Baoa Qu when his RX-- is pierced through the torso by a Rick Dom's beam bazooka. This occurs as Char's unit attempts to warn him about Gihren's intention to destroy the fortress and take the Federation's offensive fleet along with it. Char and the crew of Pegasus II , along with handpicked men under Kycilia Zabi's command, make a deep penetrating attack against the Side  and together kill Gihren Zabi, after which Kycilia is killed by Char. Tomino later lamented that had he known that anime ending would be different and that another series would be made, he would not have killed off Amuro in the novels.  The three novels were translated into English by Frederik Schodt and published by Del Rey Books in September . At the time, there were no officially recognized romanizations of character and mecha names, and a variety of different spellings were being used in the English-language fan community. In the original three novels, therefore, Mr. Schodt wrote the name "Char" as "Sha." "Sha" is a transliteration of the Japanese pronunciation, although Mr. Tomino later publicly confirmed at Anime Expo New York  that the name was originally based on the French name Charles Aznavour, a popular French-language singer.  "Jion" as "Zeon," instead of "Zion," which was in use in some circles. Some North American fans, already attached to particular spellings, took great umbrage at Schodt's renditions, forgetting that in the original Japanese most character and mecha names are written in katakana, and that there were, therefore, no "official spellings." Many years later, when the Gundam series was finally licensed in North America, the rightsholders did come up with a unified list of "official spellings" for English-language material, and some of these spellings include Schodt's renditions, as well as the renditions to which certain North American fans were attached.  In , Frederik Schodt revised his original translation of the books, which had been out of print for nearly a decade. What had been a three volume set in the  Del Rey edition was re-released by Stone Bridge Press as one single volume of  pages  list of romanized character and mecha names, Schodt was able to use it, and Amuro's rival in the novel thus became "Char" and not "Sha"; the popular Zeon Mobile Suit, similarly, became "Zaku," and not "Zak".  Compilation movies Following the success of the Mobile Suit Gundam TV series, in  Tomino reworked the footage into three separate compilation movies. The first two movies, Mobile Suit Gundam and Mobile Suit Gundam: Soldiers of Sorrow, were released in . The third movie, Mobile Suit Gundam: Encounters in Space, was released in .  Each of the three movies is largely composed of old footage from the TV series, however Tomino felt that some things could be changed for the better. Tomino removed several aspects of the show which he felt were still too super robot-esque for the real robot series he intended Gundam to be, such as the Gundam Hammer weapon. The G-Armor upgrade parts were also completely removed and replaced in the narrative by the more realistic Core Booster support fighters, and Hayato receives a RX- Guncannon at Jaburo to replace the disadvantaged RX- Guntank. The third movie also includes a substantial amount of new footage expanding on the battles of Solomon and A Baoa Qu.  Mobile Suit Gundam III: Encounters in Space was 's fourth highest-grossing Japanese film, grossing ¥. billion.  In , the three compilation movies were first released directly to VHS subtitled into English as part of Bandai's AnimeVillage releases, which makes them among the first Gundam works released in English. The movies were released again in North America on May ,  in DVD format, available separately or in a boxed set. These are also available only with re-done Japanese audio with English subtitles, the DVDs identical to the th anniversary release of the movie compilation in Japan. The original Japanese voice cast members rerecorded their lines with the exception of those who were deceased. The th anniversary release was digitally remastered and many of the sound effects were replaced, most notably the futuristic gun sounds being replaced by louder machine gun sound effects. Also, the music soundtrack, while not remixed was rearranged and in some cases removed from some scenes. The vocal songs are rearranged also, especially in the closing credits of the second and third movies.  Bandai Visual has announced the re-release of the Mobile Suit Gundam movies on DVD from new HD masters and with the original, theatrical, mono audio mix. This boxed set was released in Japan on December , .  The trilogy of films were distributed on DVD in the United Kingdom by Beez Entertainment in  in Japanese and with a selection of subtitle tracks including English. Anime Ltd. has since acquired the UK license and has released a limited edition Blu-ray box set of the movie trilogy  as an exclusive, sold only on their AllTheAnime.com store. It was released on March, th , in Japanese with English subtitles only.  Manga There have been two manga series based on Mobile Suit Gundam. The first one is Mobile Suit Gundam  by Kazuhisa Kondo. It was published in Dengeki Comics from  to  in a total of twelve tankōbon volumes. Viz Media later published its first nine volumes between  and . The second manga is Mobile Suit Gundam: The Origin by anime character designer Yoshikazu Yasuhiko. It was published from June  to June  in Kadokawa Shoten's Gundam Ace magazine and collected in a total of  tankōbon volumes. The series was first released in English by Viz media but was dropped before it was completed; It is now currently being released by Vertical Publishing as of March .  Besides adaptations, there is a popular parody yonkoma manga titled Mobile Suit Gundam-san, which was written and drawn by Hideki Ohwada and serialized in Kadokawa Shoten's Gundam Ace magazine since . This manga was adapted into an anime in . Ohwada also created a spinoff manga, Gundam Sousei , which follows Yoshiyuki Tomino and the Sunrise staff as they work to make the television series and the compilation movies. This series was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten's Gundam Ace magazine from  to  and compiled in the Gundam-san tankōbon starting in Volume . The manga was also collected in two tankōbon volumes released in January , .  Video games Main article: List of Gundam video games   There have been many video games based on or with mobile suits from the original Gundam series. Of these, the following have crossed the border into North America:  Gundam Battle Assault, Gundam Battle Assault  Gundam Side Story : Rise From the Ashes Mobile Suit Gundam: Journey to Jaburo Mobile Suit Gundam: Zeonic Front Mobile Suit Gundam: Federation vs. Zeon Mobile Suit Gundam: Encounters in Space Mobile Suit Gundam: Gundam vs. Zeta Gundam Mobile Suit Gundam: Crossfire  MS Saga: A New Dawn  Dynasty Warriors: Gundam, Dynasty Warriors: Gundam , Dynasty Warriors: Gundam   Dynasty Warriors: Gundam Reborn  Current generation games that have been unreleased in countries outside Japan include:  Mobile Suit Gundam  Mobile Suit Gundam: Bonds of the Battlefield Mobile Suit Gundam: Spirits of Zeon ~Dual Stars of Carnage~ Mobile Suit Gundam: Spirit of Zeon ~Memory of Soldier~ Quiz Mobile Suit Gundam: Monsenshi Mobile Suit Gundam Giren's Greed: Blood of Zeon Mobile Suit Gundam: Lost War Chronicles Mobile Suit Gundam: Climax UC Mobile Suit Gundam: The One Year War Mobile Suit Gundam: Path of the Soldiers  Gundam Battle  SD Gundam G-Generation  SD Gundam SCAD Hammers Mobile Suit Gundam: Operation: Troy Kidō Senshi Gundam: Senjō no Kizuna Mobile Suit Gundam: Gundam vs. Gundam Reception See also: Cultural impact of Gundam Gundam was not popular when it first aired, and in fact came close to being cancelled. The series was originally set to run for  episodes but was cut down to  by the show's sponsors, which included Clover . However, the staff was able to negotiate a one-month extension to end the series with  episodes.  Despite being released in , the original Gundam series is still remembered and recognized within the anime fan community. The series revolutionized mecha anime,  The series was the first winner of the Animage Anime Grand Prix prize, in  and the first half of . In the top  anime from Animage, Gundam was twenty-fourth. It now stands in Odaiba along with a gift shop called "Gundam Front Tokyo."  Most of the series' critical response has been owed to the setting and characters. John Oppliger observes that the characters of Amuro Ray, to whom the young Japanese of that time could easily relate, and Char Aznable, who was "simply   Mecha anime creator Shoji Kawamori attended Keio University in the same years as Macross screenwriter Hiroshi Ōnogi and character designer Haruhiko Mikimoto, where they had a Mobile Suit Gundam fan club called "Gunsight One", a name they would use years later as the call sign of the bridge of the SDF- spaceship from their first Macross anime television series. In fact, The Super Dimension Fortress Macross mecha anime series was inspired by Gundam in several aspects during its early development.  American musician Richie Kotzen, former guitarist from Poison and Mr. Big, released an album called Ai Senshi ZxR in  in Japan. The album consisted of covered music from the Gundam series and original songs. American musician Andrew W.K. also released an album called Gundam Rock on September , , in Japan. The album consists of covered music from the Gundam series to celebrate its th Anniversary.  Background research The background research of Mobile Suit Gundam is well praised in its field. The positions in which the colonies  are based on the O'Neill cylinder design for space habitats.  Gundam-themed rides "Gundam the Ride: A Baoa Qu" was an amusement park attraction at the Fuji-Q Highland Amusement Park located in Fujiyoshida, Yamanashi, Japan. It was a dark ride for the park. Gundam the Ride, which opened to the public on July , , was based on Mobile Suit Gundam. Set during the final chaotic Battle of A Baoa Qu, Gundam the Ride places its riders in an Escape Launch Shuttle about to leave the battleship Suruga.  The animation of Gundam the Ride used mostly computer graphics, however, all human characters were hand-drawn cel animation, similar to the style current Gundam video games are done in. All of the character designs for Gundam the Ride were done by Haruhiko Mikimoto. The ride's characters make a cameo appearance in the video game "Encounters in Space" while the player  is making his way through the Dolos.  The ride closed on January ,  and replaced with "Gundam Crisis Attraction" The main feature of this attraction is a full size : Gundam model, lying flat inside the venue. Instead of sitting in a movable cockpit and watching a CG movie, it requires participants to carry handheld devices throughout the attraction to find certain pieces of information, similar to a scavenger hunt, in order to activate the Gundam. The interior of the attraction is a mock-up of a Federation ship, and employees remain in-character inside of the ride. 