Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie Film poster Japanese	劇場版カードキャプターさくら Hepburn	Gekijōban Kādokyaputā Sakura Directed by	Morio Asaka Produced by	Kazuhiko Ikeguchi Tatsuya Ono Written by	Nanase Ohkawa Based on	Cardcaptor Sakura by Clamp Starring	Sakura Tange Aya Hisakawa Motoko Kumai Junko Iwao Tomokazu Seki Megumi Ogata Yukana Nogami Music by	Takayuki Negishi Cinematography	Hisao Shirai Edited by	Harutoshi Ogata Production company Madhouse Distributed by	Bandai Visual Shochiku Release date August ,  Running time  minutes Country	Japan Language	Japanese Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie  is a Japanese anime film directed by Morio Asaka and produced by Madhouse and Bandai Visual. The film is based on the anime television series adaptation of Clamp's Cardcaptor Sakura manga series. Written by Nanase Ohkawa, Clamp's head writer, it was released in Japanese theaters on August , . It won the Feature Film Award at the  Animation Kobe. A second film, Cardcaptor Sakura Movie : The Sealed Card, followed in . Set between the first and second seasons of the television series, the film shows Sakura and her friends going to Hong Kong where they encounter a vengeful spirit who was hurt by Clow Reed in the past.  Contents 	Plot 	Cast 	Production 	Media releases 	References 	External links Plot Sakura Kinomoto, Cardcaptor of the Clow Cards, successfully seals the Arrow Card with help from her friends Syaoran Li, Kero, Tomoyo Daidoji, and Meiling Li. That night, Sakura experiences a strange dream where two pieces of cloth pull her underwater. After school ends for spring break, Sakura and Tomoyo visit the "Twin Bells" shop where Sakura participates in a lottery to win a vacation to Hong Kong. As Sakura reaches for a lottery ball, one magically flies into her hand, the winning ball for the vacation. Sakura goes with Tomoyo, Kero, her big brother Toya and his best friend Yukito Tsukishiro, who Sakura has a crush on.  The group tour the city but Sakura experiences the dream again which this time features two malevolent birds and a mysterious woman sports the floating cloths. During a tour of the Yuen Po Street Bird Garden , Sakura spots the two birds and pursues them across the city, finding an old water well where the clothes emerge and hypnotise her. As Sakura is drawn towards the well, Syaoran appears and scares the birds away. Reuniting with the others including Meiling, Sakura is taken to the Li family estate where she meets Syaoran's eccentric sisters and his mother Yelan, a powerful sorceress who senses Sakura is in danger. Staying for the night, Sakura experiences the dream again where the woman attacks her. Yelan takes Sakura outside and warns her that the woman is extremely powerful and is deliberately contacting Sakura. The next day, Syaoran and Meiling are forced to accompany Sakura and co. around Hong Kong should something happen.  Sakura spots the birds again and pursues them with Kero. They chase them down to an antiques store, where they come across an old book that has a picture of the woman on the cover. Sakura is hypnotised again and opens the book before her friends, flooding the shop and transporting the group to another dimension where the woman dwells. The birds are revealed to be her cloths. The woman, actually a sorceress referred to as Madoushi , attacks Sakura in rage, believing she had summoned Clow Reed, creator of the Clow Cards. Sakura discovers that her friends, except for Syaoran, have been taken prisoner, and Madoushi demands Clow comes in exchange for their freedom. Syaoran distracts Madoushi so Sakura can rescue Tomoyo but is captured as well. Sakura escapes with Kero and Tomoyo back to the antiques store, but find the book has vanished. Kero realises he knows Madoushi, a fortune teller who Clow fell in love with and taught her magic. But she used them for evil and was imprisoned in another dimension by Clow, but is likely unaware she is a spirit. Sakura realises the well appeared on the book cover and it is another entrance to Madoushi's prison.  Going to the well, Sakura encounters Yelan who breaks the shield surrounding the well to allow Sakura and Kero to enter. Sakura confronts Madoushi who uses the magic of Sakura's friends to escape her prison but is shocked by Hong Kong's appearance. Sakura and Kero follow, but Madoushi captures Sakura and holds her prisoner. When Sakura tells her of Clow's passing, Madoushi angrily tries to drown Sakura by trapping her in a flooded skyscraper with her cloths. Sakura uses the Arrow Card to escape and she confronts Madoushi, sympathising with the sorceress and confirms Clow is dead. Madoushi dissolves into water, passing on, but releases Sakura's friends. While Toya and Yukito have no memory of what happened, Sakura tells Tomoyo and Kero they may have to visit Hong Kong again in the future.  Cast Character	Japanese	English Sakura Kinomoto / Sakura Avalon	Sakura Tange	Carly McKillip Tomoyo Daidoji / Madison Taylor	Junko Iwao	Maggie Blue O'Hara Syaoran Li / Li Showron	Motoko Kumai	Rhys Huber Kero	Aya Hisakawa	Matt Hill Meiling Li / Meilin Rae	Yukana Nogami	Nicole Oliver Toya Kinomoto / Tori Avalon	Tomokazu Seki	Tony Sampson Yukito Tsukishiro / Julian Star	Megumi Ogata	Samuel Vincent Fujitaka Kinomoto / Aiden Avalon	Hideyuki Tanaka	Brian Drummond Clow Reed	Kazuo Hayashi	Dale Wilson Yelan Li	Kikuko Inoue	Stevie Vallance Madoushi / Su Yung	Megumi Hayashibara	Nicole Oliver Fudie Li	Yuriko Yamaguchi	– Shiefa Li	Chiyako Shibahara	– Fanren Li	Rika Wakusawa	– Feimei Li	Sachiko Sugawara	– Yoshiyuki Terada / Mr. Terada	Toru Furusawa	Brian Drummond Maki Matsumoto / Maggie	Kotono Mitsuishi	Nicole Oliver Production The same production staff that produced the anime television series adaptation of Cardcaptor Sakura also produced Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie.  Media releases Cardcaptor Sakura: The Movie was released on VHS, LD and DVD in Japan by Bandai Visual on February , .  The theme song for the film is "Tōi Kono Machi de"  by Naomi Kaitani. The single containing the song was released on August ,  by Victor Entertainment. 