cs and chemistry can be formulated as differential equations. In biology and economics, differential equations are used to model the behavior of complex systems. The mathematical theory of differential equations first developed together with the sciences where the equations had originated and where the results found application.  owever, diverse problems, sometimes originating in quite distinct scientific fields, may give rise to identical differential equations. Whenever this happens, mathematical theory behind the equations can be viewed as a unifying principle behind diverse phenomena. As an example, consider the propagation of light and sound in the atmosphere, and of waves on the surface of a pond. All of them may be described by the same second-order partial differential equation, the wave equation, which allows us to think of light and sound as forms of waves, much like familiar waves in the water. Conduction of heat, the theory of which was developed by Joseph Fourier, is governed by another second-order partial differential equation, the heat equation. It turns out that many diffusion processes, while seemingly different, are described by the same equation; the Black窶鉄choles equation in finance is, for instance, related to the heat equation.  Physics Euler窶鏑agrange equation in classical mechanics  amilton's equations in classical mechanics Radioactive decay in nuclear physics Newton's law of cooling in thermodynamics The wave equation The heat equation in thermodynamics Laplace's equation, which defines harmonic functions Poisson's equation The geodesic equation The Navier窶鉄tokes equations in fluid dynamics The Diffusion equation in stochastic processes The Convection窶電iffusion equation in fluid dynamics The Cauchy窶迭iemann equations in complex analysis The Poisson窶釘oltzmann equation in molecular dynamics The shallow water equations Universal differential equation The Lorenz equations whose solutions exhibit chaotic flow. Classical mechanics So long as the force acting on a particle is known, Newton's second law is sufficient to describe the motion of a particle. Once independent relations for each force acting on a particle are available, they can be substituted into Newton's second law to obtain an ordinary differential equation, which is called the equation of motion.  Electrodynamics Maxwell's equations are a set of partial differential equations that, together with the Lorentz force law, form the foundation of classical electrodynamics, classical optics, and electric circuits. These fields in turn underlie modern electrical and communications technologies. Maxwell's equations describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated and altered by each other and by charges and currents. They are named after the Scottish physicist and mathematician James Clerk Maxwell, who published an early form of those equations between  and .  General relativity The Einstein field equations  are a set of ten partial differential equations in Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity which describe the fundamental interaction of gravitation as a result of spacetime being curved by matter and energy.  Quantum mechanics In quantum mechanics, the analogue of Newton's law is Schrテカdinger's equation .  Biology Verhulst equation 窶biological population growth von Bertalanffy model – biological individual growth Replicator dynamics – found in theoretical biology  odgkin– uxley model – neural action potentials Predator-prey equations The Lotka–Volterra equations, also known as the predator–prey equations, are a pair of first-order, non-linear, differential equations frequently used to describe the population dynamics of two species that interact, one as a predator and the other as prey.  Chemistry The rate law or rate equation for a chemical reaction is a differential equation that links the reaction rate with concentrations or pressures of reactants and constant parameters . In addition, a range of differential equations are present in the study of thermodynamics and quantum mechanics.  Economics The key equation of the Solow–Swan model is -\delta k The Black–Scholes PDE Malthusian growth model The Vidale–Wolfe advertising model~      