Physics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the field of science. For other uses, see Physics . Not to be confused with Physical science.  Various examples of physical phenomena Physics , lit. 'knowledge of nature', from φύσις phýsis "nature"  Physics is one of the oldest academic disciplines and, through its inclusion of astronomy, perhaps the oldest. and suggest new avenues of research in academic disciplines such as mathematics and philosophy.  Breakthroughs in physics often enable advances in new technologies. For example, advances in the understanding of electromagnetism and nuclear physics led directly to the development of new products that have dramatically transformed modern-day society, such as television, computers, domestic appliances, and nuclear weapons; advances in thermodynamics led to the development of industrialization; and advances in mechanics inspired the development of calculus.  Contents 	 istory .	Ancient astronomy .	Natural philosophy .	Physics in the medieval Islamic world .	Classical physics .	Modern physics 	Philosophy 	Core theories .	Classical physics .	Modern physics .	Difference between classical and modern physics 	Relation to other fields .	Prerequisites .	Application and influence 	Research .	Scientific method .	Theory and experiment .	Scope and aims .	Research fields ..	Nuclear and particle physics ..	Atomic, molecular, and optical physics ..	Condensed matter physics ..	Astrophysics 	Current research 	See also 	Notes 	References 	Sources 	Further reading 	External links  istory Main article:  istory of physics Ancient astronomy Main article:  istory of astronomy  Ancient Egyptian astronomy is evident in monuments like the ceiling of Senemut's tomb from the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. Astronomy is the oldest of the natural sciences. The earliest civilizations dating back to beyond  BCE, such as the Sumerians, ancient Egyptians, and the Indus Valley Civilization, all had a predictive knowledge and a basic understanding of the motions of the Sun, Moon, and stars. The stars and planets were often a target of worship, believed to represent their gods. While the explanations for these phenomena were often unscientific and lacking in evidence, these early observations laid the foundation for later astronomy.  According to Asger Aaboe, the origins of Western astronomy can be found in Mesopotamia, and all Western efforts in the exact sciences are descended from late Babylonian astronomy.  Natural philosophy Main article: Natural philosophy Natural philosophy has its origins in Greece during the Archaic period, , when pre-Socratic philosophers like Thales rejected non-naturalistic explanations for natural phenomena and proclaimed that every event had a natural cause.  Physics in the medieval Islamic world Main article: Physics in the medieval Islamic world  The basic way a pinhole camera works Islamic scholarship had inherited Aristotelian physics from the Greeks and during the Islamic Golden Age developed it further, especially placing emphasis on observation and a priori reasoning, developing early forms of the scientific method.  The most notable innovations were in the field of optics and vision, which came from the works of many scientists like Ibn Sahl, Al-Kindi, Ibn al- aytham, Al-Farisi and Avicenna. The most notable work was The Book of Optics  and delved further into the way the eye itself works. Using dissections and the knowledge of previous scholars, he was able to begin to explain how light enters the eye.  e asserted that the light ray is focused, but the actual explanation of how light projected to the back of the eye had to wait until .  is Treatise on Light explained the world's first camera obscura, hundreds of years before the modern development of photography.  Ibn Al- aytham  drawing Ibn al- aytham , Book of Optics Book I,  The seven-volume Book of Optics  hugely influenced thinking across disciplines from the theory of visual perception to the nature of perspective in medieval art, in both the East and the West, for more than  years. Many later European scholars and fellow polymaths, from Robert Grosseteste and Leonardo da Vinci to René Descartes, Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton, were in his debt. Indeed, the influence of Ibn al- aytham's Optics ranks alongside that of Newton's work of the same title, published  years later.  The translation of The Book of Optics had a huge impact on Europe. From it, later European scholars were able to build devices that replicated those Ibn al- aytham had built, and understand the way light works. From this, such important things as eyeglasses, magnifying glasses, telescopes, and cameras were developed.  Classical physics Main article: Classical physics  Sir Isaac Newton , whose laws of motion and universal gravitation were major milestones in classical physics Physics became a separate science when early modern Europeans used experimental and quantitative methods to discover what are now considered to be the laws of physics.  Major developments in this period include the replacement of the geocentric model of the solar system with the heliocentric Copernican model, the laws governing the motion of planetary bodies determined by Johannes Kepler between  and , pioneering work on telescopes and observational astronomy by Galileo Galilei in the th and th Centuries, and Isaac Newton's discovery and unification of the laws of motion and universal gravitation that would come to bear his name.  The discovery of new laws in thermodynamics, chemistry, and electromagnetics resulted from greater research efforts during the Industrial Revolution as energy needs increased. The laws comprising classical physics remain very widely used for objects on everyday scales travelling at non-relativistic speeds, since they provide a very close approximation in such situations, and theories such as quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity simplify to their classical equivalents at such scales.  owever, inaccuracies in classical mechanics for very small objects and very high velocities led to the development of modern physics in the th century.  Modern physics Main article: Modern physics See also:  istory of special relativity and  istory of quantum mechanics  Albert Einstein , whose work on the photoelectric effect and the theory of relativity led to a revolution in th century physics  Max Planck , the originator of the theory of quantum mechanics Modern physics began in the early th century with the work of Max Planck in quantum theory and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. Both of these theories came about due to inaccuracies in classical mechanics in certain situations. Classical mechanics predicted a varying speed of light, which could not be resolved with the constant speed predicted by Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism; this discrepancy was corrected by Einstein's theory of special relativity, which replaced classical mechanics for fast-moving bodies and allowed for a constant speed of light.  Quantum mechanics would come to be pioneered by Werner  eisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger and Paul Dirac. Areas of mathematics in general are important to this field, such as the study of probabilities and groups.  Philosophy Main article: Philosophy of physics In many ways, physics stems from ancient Greek philosophy. From Thales' first attempt to characterise matter, to Democritus' deduction that matter ought to reduce to an invariant state, the Ptolemaic astronomy of a crystalline firmament, and Aristotle's book Physics , various Greek philosophers advanced their own theories of nature. Physics was known as natural philosophy until the late th century.  By the th century, physics was realised as a discipline distinct from philosophy and the other sciences. Physics, as with the rest of science, relies on philosophy of science and its "scientific method" to advance our knowledge of the physical world.  The development of physics has answered many questions of early philosophers, but has also raised new questions. Study of the philosophical issues surrounding physics, the philosophy of physics, involves issues such as the nature of space and time, determinism, and metaphysical outlooks such as empiricism, naturalism and realism.  Many physicists have written about the philosophical implications of their work, for instance Laplace, who championed causal determinism,  Core theories Further information: Branches of physics and Outline of physics Though physics deals with a wide variety of systems, certain theories are used by all physicists. Each of these theories were experimentally tested numerous times and found to be an adequate approximation of nature. For instance, the theory of classical mechanics accurately describes the motion of objects, provided they are much larger than atoms and moving at much less than the speed of light. These theories continue to be areas of active research today. Chaos theory, a remarkable aspect of classical mechanics was discovered in the th century, three centuries after the original formulation of classical mechanics by Isaac Newton .  These central theories are important tools for research into more specialised topics, and any physicist, regardless of their specialisation, is expected to be literate in them. These include classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, electromagnetism, and special relativity.  Classical physics Main article: Classical physics  Classical physics implemented in an acoustic engineering model of sound reflecting from an acoustic diffuser Classical physics includes the traditional branches and topics that were recognised and well-developed before the beginning of the th century—classical mechanics, acoustics, optics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism. Classical mechanics is concerned with bodies acted on by forces and bodies in motion and may be divided into statics , the latter include such branches as hydrostatics, hydrodynamics, aerodynamics, and pneumatics. Acoustics is the study of how sound is produced, controlled, transmitted and received.  Optics, the study of light, is concerned not only with visible light but also with infrared and ultraviolet radiation, which exhibit all of the phenomena of visible light except visibility, e.g., reflection, refraction, interference, diffraction, dispersion, and polarization of light.  eat is a form of energy, the internal energy possessed by the particles of which a substance is composed; thermodynamics deals with the relationships between heat and other forms of energy. Electricity and magnetism have been studied as a single branch of physics since the intimate connection between them was discovered in the early th century; an electric current gives rise to a magnetic field, and a changing magnetic field induces an electric current. Electrostatics deals with electric charges at rest, electrodynamics with moving charges, and magnetostatics with magnetic poles at rest.  Modern physics Main article: Modern physics Modern physics   Manifold dynamics: Schrödinger and Klein–Gordon equations Founders Concepts Branches Scientists v t e  Solvay Conference of , with prominent physicists such as Albert Einstein, Werner  eisenberg, Max Planck,  endrik Lorentz, Niels Bohr, Marie Curie, Erwin Schrödinger and Paul Dirac Classical physics is generally concerned with matter and energy on the normal scale of observation, while much of modern physics is concerned with the behavior of matter and energy under extreme conditions or on a very large or very small scale. For example, atomic and nuclear physics studies matter on the smallest scale at which chemical elements can be identified. The physics of elementary particles is on an even smaller scale since it is concerned with the most basic units of matter; this branch of physics is also known as high-energy physics because of the extremely high energies necessary to produce many types of particles in particle accelerators. On this scale, ordinary, commonsense notions of space, time, matter, and energy are no longer valid.  The two chief theories of modern physics present a different picture of the concepts of space, time, and matter from that presented by classical physics. Classical mechanics approximates nature as continuous, while quantum theory is concerned with the discrete nature of many phenomena at the atomic and subatomic level and with the complementary aspects of particles and waves in the description of such phenomena. The theory of relativity is concerned with the description of phenomena that take place in a frame of reference that is in motion with respect to an observer; the special theory of relativity is concerned with relative uniform motion in a straight line and the general theory of relativity with accelerated motion and its connection with gravitation. Both quantum theory and the theory of relativity find applications in all areas of modern physics.  Difference between classical and modern physics  The basic domains of physics While physics aims to discover universal laws, its theories lie in explicit domains of applicability. Loosely speaking, the laws of classical physics accurately describe systems whose important length scales are greater than the atomic scale and whose motions are much slower than the speed of light. Outside of this domain, observations do not match predictions provided by classical mechanics. Albert Einstein contributed the framework of special relativity, which replaced notions of absolute time and space with spacetime and allowed an accurate description of systems whose components have speeds approaching the speed of light. Max Planck, Erwin Schrödinger, and others introduced quantum mechanics, a probabilistic notion of particles and interactions that allowed an accurate description of atomic and subatomic scales. Later, quantum field theory unified quantum mechanics and special relativity. General relativity allowed for a dynamical, curved spacetime, with which highly massive systems and the large-scale structure of the universe can be well-described. General relativity has not yet been unified with the other fundamental descriptions; several candidate theories of quantum gravity are being developed.  Relation to other fields  This parabola-shaped lava flow illustrates the application of mathematics in physics—in this case, Galileo's law of falling bodies.  Mathematics and ontology are used in physics. Physics is used in chemistry and cosmology. Prerequisites Mathematics provides a compact and exact language used to describe of the order in nature. This was noted and advocated by Pythagoras, and Newton.  Physics uses mathematics to organise and formulate experimental results. From those results, precise or estimated solutions, quantitative results from which new predictions can be made and experimentally confirmed or negated. The results from physics experiments are numerical measurements. Technologies based on mathematics, like computation have made computational physics an active area of research.   The distinction between mathematics and physics is clear-cut, but not always obvious, especially in mathematical physics. Ontology is a prerequisite for physics, but not for mathematics. It means physics is ultimately concerned with descriptions of the real world, while mathematics is concerned with abstract patterns, even beyond the real world. Thus physics statements are synthetic, while mathematical statements are analytic. Mathematics contains hypotheses, while physics contains theories. Mathematics statements have to be only logically true, while predictions of physics statements must match observed and experimental data.  The distinction is clear-cut, but not always obvious. For example, mathematical physics is the application of mathematics in physics. Its methods are mathematical, but its subject is physical.  Physics is a branch of fundamental science, not practical science. Physics is also called "the fundamental science" because the subject of study of all branches of natural science like chemistry, astronomy, geology, and biology are constrained by laws of physics, similar to how chemistry is often called the central science because of its role in linking the physical sciences. For example, chemistry studies properties, structures, and reactions of matter . Structures are formed because particles exert electrical forces on each other, properties include physical characteristics of given substances, and reactions are bound by laws of physics, like conservation of energy, mass, and charge.  Physics is applied in industries like engineering and medicine.  Application and influence Main article: Applied physics  Archimedes' screw, a simple machine for lifting  The application of physical laws in lifting liquids Applied physics is a general term for physics research which is intended for a particular use. An applied physics curriculum usually contains a few classes in an applied discipline, like geology or electrical engineering. It usually differs from engineering in that an applied physicist may not be designing something in particular, but rather is using physics or conducting physics research with the aim of developing new technologies or solving a problem.  The approach is similar to that of applied mathematics. Applied physicists use physics in scientific research. For instance, people working on accelerator physics might seek to build better particle detectors for research in theoretical physics.  Physics is used heavily in engineering. For example, statics, a subfield of mechanics, is used in the building of bridges and other static structures. The understanding and use of acoustics results in sound control and better concert halls; similarly, the use of optics creates better optical devices. An understanding of physics makes for more realistic flight simulators, video games, and movies, and is often critical in forensic investigations.  With the standard consensus that the laws of physics are universal and do not change with time, physics can be used to study things that would ordinarily be mired in uncertainty. For example, in the study of the origin of the earth, one can reasonably model earth's mass, temperature, and rate of rotation, as a function of time allowing one to extrapolate forward or backward in time and so predict future or prior events. It also allows for simulations in engineering which drastically speed up the development of a new technology.  But there is also considerable interdisciplinarity in the physicist's methods, so many other important fields are influenced by physics .  Research Scientific method Physicists use the scientific method to test the validity of a physical theory. By using a methodical approach to compare the implications of a theory with the conclusions drawn from its related experiments and observations, physicists are better able to test the validity of a theory in a logical, unbiased, and repeatable way. To that end, experiments are performed and observations are made in order to determine the validity or invalidity of the theory.  A scientific law is a concise verbal or mathematical statement of a relation which expresses a fundamental principle of some theory, such as Newton's law of universal gravitation.  Theory and experiment Main articles: Theoretical physics and Experimental physics  The astronaut and Earth are both in free-fall  Lightning is an electric current Theorists seek to develop mathematical models that both agree with existing experiments and successfully predict future experimental results, while experimentalists devise and perform experiments to test theoretical predictions and explore new phenomena. Although theory and experiment are developed separately, they are strongly dependent upon each other. Progress in physics frequently comes about when experimentalists make a discovery that existing theories cannot explain, or when new theories generate experimentally testable predictions, which inspire new experiments.  Physicists who work at the interplay of theory and experiment are called phenomenologists, who study complex phenomena observed in experiment and work to relate them to a fundamental theory.  Theoretical physics has historically taken inspiration from philosophy; electromagnetism was unified this way. such as parallel universes, a multiverse, and higher dimensions. Theorists invoke these ideas in hopes of solving particular problems with existing theories. They then explore the consequences of these ideas and work toward making testable predictions.  Experimental physics expands, and is expanded by, engineering and technology. Experimental physicists involved in basic research design and perform experiments with equipment such as particle accelerators and lasers, whereas those involved in applied research often work in industry developing technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging  and transistors. Feynman has noted that experimentalists may seek areas which are not well-explored by theorists.  Scope and aims  Physics involves modeling the natural world with theory, usually quantitative.  ere, the path of a particle is modeled with the mathematics of calculus to explain its behavior: the purview of the branch of physics known as mechanics. Physics covers a wide range of phenomena, from elementary particles  to the largest superclusters of galaxies. Included in these phenomena are the most basic objects composing all other things. Therefore, physics is sometimes called the "fundamental science". Physics aims to describe the various phenomena that occur in nature in terms of simpler phenomena. Thus, physics aims to both connect the things observable to humans to root causes, and then connect these causes together.  For example, the ancient Chinese observed that certain rocks  were attracted to one another by an invisible force. This effect was later called magnetism, which was first rigorously studied in the th century. But even before the Chinese discovered magnetism, the ancient Greeks knew of other objects such as amber, that when rubbed with fur would cause a similar invisible attraction between the two.  Research fields Contemporary research in physics can be broadly divided into nuclear and particle physics; condensed matter physics; atomic, molecular, and optical physics; astrophysics; and applied physics. Some physics departments also support physics education research and physics outreach.  Since the th century, the individual fields of physics have become increasingly specialised, and today most physicists work in a single field for their entire careers. "Universalists" such as Albert Einstein , who worked in multiple fields of physics, are now very rare.  The major fields of physics, along with their subfields and the theories and concepts they employ, are shown in the following table.  Field	Subfields	Major theories	Concepts Nuclear and particle physics	Nuclear physics, Nuclear astrophysics, Particle physics, Particle astrophysics, Particle physics phenomenology	Standard Model, Quantum field theory, Quantum electrodynamics, Quantum chromodynamics, Electroweak theory, Effective field theory, Lattice field theory, Lattice gauge theory, Gauge theory, Supersymmetry, Grand unification theory, Superstring theory, M-theory	Fundamental force , Elementary particle, Spin, Antimatter, Spontaneous symmetry breaking, Neutrino oscillation, Seesaw mechanism, Brane, String, Quantum gravity, Theory of everything, Vacuum energy Atomic, molecular, and optical physics	Atomic physics, Molecular physics, Atomic and Molecular astrophysics, Chemical physics, Optics, Photonics	Quantum optics, Quantum chemistry, Quantum information science	Photon, Atom, Molecule, Diffraction, Electromagnetic radiation, Laser, Polarization , Spectral line, Casimir effect Condensed matter physics	Solid state physics,  igh pressure physics, Low-temperature physics, Surface Physics, Nanoscale and Mesoscopic physics, Polymer physics	BCS theory, Bloch wave, Density functional theory, Fermi gas, Fermi liquid, Many-body theory, Statistical Mechanics	Phases , Bose-Einstein condensate, Electrical conduction, Phonon, Magnetism, Self-organization, Semiconductor, superconductor, superfluid, Spin, Astrophysics	Astronomy, Astrometry, Cosmology, Gravitation physics,  igh-energy astrophysics, Planetary astrophysics, Plasma physics, Solar physics, Space physics, Stellar astrophysics	Big Bang, Cosmic inflation, General relativity, Newton's law of universal gravitation, Lambda-CDM model, Magnetohydrodynamics	Black hole, Cosmic background radiation, Cosmic string, Cosmos, Dark energy, Dark matter, Galaxy, Gravity, Gravitational radiation, Gravitational singularity, Planet, Solar System, Star, Supernova, Universe Applied Physics	Accelerator physics, Acoustics, Agrophysics, Biophysics, Chemical Physics, Communication Physics, Econophysics, Engineering physics, Fluid dynamics, Geophysics, Laser Physics, Materials physics, Medical physics, Nanotechnology, Optics, Optoelectronics, Photonics, Photovoltaics, Physical chemistry, Physics of computation, Plasma physics, Solid-state devices, Quantum chemistry, Quantum electronics, Quantum information science, Vehicle dynamics Nuclear and particle physics Main articles: Particle physics and Nuclear physics  A simulated event in the CMS detector of the Large  adron Collider, featuring a possible appearance of the  iggs boson. Particle physics is the study of the elementary constituents of matter and energy and the interactions between them.  Currently, the interactions of elementary particles and fields are described by the Standard Model. an integral part of a  iggs mechanism.  Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies the constituents and interactions of atomic nuclei. The most commonly known applications of nuclear physics are nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons technology, but the research has provided application in many fields, including those in nuclear medicine and magnetic resonance imaging, ion implantation in materials engineering, and radiocarbon dating in geology and archaeology.  Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Main article: Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics .  Atomic physics studies the electron shells of atoms. Current research focuses on activities in quantum control, cooling and trapping of atoms and ions, low-temperature collision dynamics and the effects of electron correlation on structure and dynamics. Atomic physics is influenced by the nucleus , but intra-nuclear phenomena such as fission and fusion are considered part of nuclear physics.  Molecular physics focuses on multi-atomic structures and their internal and external interactions with matter and light. Optical physics is distinct from optics in that it tends to focus not on the control of classical light fields by macroscopic objects but on the fundamental properties of optical fields and their interactions with matter in the microscopic realm.  Condensed matter physics Main article: Condensed matter physics  Velocity-distribution data of a gas of rubidium atoms, confirming the discovery of a new phase of matter, the Bose–Einstein condensate Condensed matter physics is the field of physics that deals with the macroscopic physical properties of matter.  The most familiar examples of condensed phases are solids and liquids, which arise from the bonding by way of the electromagnetic force between atoms.  Condensed matter physics is the largest field of contemporary physics.  istorically, condensed matter physics grew out of solid-state physics, which is now considered one of its main subfields.  Astrophysics Main articles: Astrophysics and Physical cosmology  The deepest visible-light image of the universe, the  ubble Ultra Deep Field Astrophysics and astronomy are the application of the theories and methods of physics to the study of stellar structure, stellar evolution, the origin of the Solar System, and related problems of cosmology. Because astrophysics is a broad subject, astrophysicists typically apply many disciplines of physics, including mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, relativity, nuclear and particle physics, and atomic and molecular physics.  The discovery by Karl Jansky in  that radio signals were emitted by celestial bodies initiated the science of radio astronomy. Most recently, the frontiers of astronomy have been expanded by space exploration. Perturbations and interference from the earth's atmosphere make space-based observations necessary for infrared, ultraviolet, gamma-ray, and X-ray astronomy.  Physical cosmology is the study of the formation and evolution of the universe on its largest scales. Albert Einstein's theory of relativity plays a central role in all modern cosmological theories. In the early th century,  ubble's discovery that the universe is expanding, as shown by the  ubble diagram, prompted rival explanations known as the steady state universe and the Big Bang.  The Big Bang was confirmed by the success of Big Bang nucleosynthesis and the discovery of the cosmic microwave background in . The Big Bang model rests on two theoretical pillars: Albert Einstein's general relativity and the cosmological principle. Cosmologists have recently established the ΛCDM model of the evolution of the universe, which includes cosmic inflation, dark energy, and dark matter.  Numerous possibilities and discoveries are anticipated to emerge from new data from the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope over the upcoming decade and vastly revise or clarify existing models of the universe. Fermi will search for evidence that dark matter is composed of weakly interacting massive particles, complementing similar experiments with the Large  adron Collider and other underground detectors.  IBEX is already yielding new astrophysical discoveries: "No one knows what is creating the ENA  ribbon" along the termination shock of the solar wind, "but everyone agrees that it means the textbook picture of the heliosphere—in which the Solar System's enveloping pocket filled with the solar wind's charged particles is plowing through the onrushing 'galactic wind' of the interstellar medium in the shape of a comet—is wrong."  Current research Further information: List of unsolved problems in physics  Feynman diagram signed by R. P. Feynman.  A typical event described by physics: a magnet levitating above a superconductor demonstrates the Meissner effect. Research in physics is continually progressing on a large number of fronts.  In condensed matter physics, an important unsolved theoretical problem is that of high-temperature superconductivity.  In particle physics, the first pieces of experimental evidence for physics beyond the Standard Model have begun to appear. Foremost among these are indications that neutrinos have non-zero mass. These experimental results appear to have solved the long-standing solar neutrino problem, and the physics of massive neutrinos remains an area of active theoretical and experimental research. The Large  adron Collider has already found the  iggs Boson, but future research aims to prove or disprove the supersymmetry, which extends the Standard Model of particle physics. Research on the nature of the major mysteries of dark matter and dark energy is also currently ongoing.  Theoretical attempts to unify quantum mechanics and general relativity into a single theory of quantum gravity, a program ongoing for over half a century, have not yet been decisively resolved. The current leading candidates are M-theory, superstring theory and loop quantum gravity.  Many astronomical and cosmological phenomena have yet to be satisfactorily explained, including the origin of ultra-high energy cosmic rays, the baryon asymmetry, the acceleration of the universe and the anomalous rotation rates of galaxies.  Although much progress has been made in high-energy, quantum, and astronomical physics, many everyday phenomena involving complexity,  These complex phenomena have received growing attention since the s for several reasons, including the availability of modern mathematical methods and computers, which enabled complex systems to be modeled in new ways. Complex physics has become part of increasingly interdisciplinary research, as exemplified by the study of turbulence in aerodynamics and the observation of pattern formation in biological systems. In the  Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics,  orace Lamb said:  I am an old man now, and when I die and go to heaven there are two matters on which I hope for enlightenment. One is quantum electrodynamics, and the other is the turbulent motion of fluids. And about the former I am rather optimistic.      