Vector calculus From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with geometric calculus or matrix calculus.  This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.  Part of a series of articles about Calculus Fundamental theorem Limits of functions Continuity Mean value theorem Rolle's theorem Differential Integral Series Vector Multivariable Specialized Glossary of calculus v t e Vector calculus, or vector analysis, is a branch of mathematics concerned with differentiation and integration of vector fields, primarily in -dimensional Euclidean space . The term "vector calculus" is sometimes used as a synonym for the broader subject of multivariable calculus, which includes vector calculus as well as partial differentiation and multiple integration. Vector calculus plays an important role in differential geometry and in the study of partial differential equations. It is used extensively in physics and engineering, especially in the description of electromagnetic fields, gravitational fields and fluid flow.  Vector calculus was developed from quaternion analysis by J. Willard Gibbs and Oliver  eaviside near the end of the th century, and most of the notation and terminology was established by Gibbs and Edwin Bidwell Wilson in their  book, Vector Analysis. In the conventional form using cross products, vector calculus does not generalize to higher dimensions, while the alternative approach of geometric algebra, which uses exterior products does generalize, as discussed below.  Contents 	Basic objects .	Scalar fields .	Vector fields .	Vectors and pseudovectors 	Vector algebra 	Operators and theorems .	Differential operators .	Integral theorems 	Applications .	Linear approximations .	Optimization .	Physics and engineering 	Generalizations .	Different -manifolds .	Other dimensions 	See also 	References 	External links Basic objects Scalar fields Main article: Scalar field A scalar field associates a scalar value to every point in a space. The scalar may either be a mathematical number or a physical quantity. Examples of scalar fields in applications include the temperature distribution throughout space, the pressure distribution in a fluid, and spin-zero quantum fields, such as the  iggs field. These fields are the subject of scalar field theory.  Vector fields Main article: Vector field A vector field is an assignment of a vector to each point in a subset of space. A vector field in the plane, for instance, can be visualized as a collection of arrows with a given magnitude and direction each attached to a point in the plane. Vector fields are often used to model, for example, the speed and direction of a moving fluid throughout space, or the strength and direction of some force, such as the magnetic or gravitational force, as it changes from point to point.  Vectors and pseudovectors In more advanced treatments, one further distinguishes pseudovector fields and pseudoscalar fields, which are identical to vector fields and scalar fields except that they change sign under an orientation-reversing map: for example, the curl of a vector field is a pseudovector field, and if one reflects a vector field, the curl points in the opposite direction. This distinction is clarified and elaborated in geometric algebra, as described below.  Vector algebra Main article: Vector algebra The algebraic  operations in vector calculus are referred to as vector algebra, being defined for a vector space and then globally applied to a vector field. The basic algebraic operations consist of:  Operation	Notation	Description Vector addition		Addition of two vector fields, yielding a vector field. Scalar multiplication		Multiplication of a scalar field and a vector field, yielding a vector field. Dot product		Multiplication of two vector fields, yielding a scalar field. Cross product	, yielding a vector field. Also commonly used are the two triple products:  Operation	Notation	Description Scalar triple product	\right)	The dot product of a vector and a cross product of two vectors. Vector triple product	\right)	The cross product of a vector and a cross product of two vectors. Operators and theorems Main article: Vector calculus identities Differential operators Main articles: Gradient, Divergence, Curl , and Laplacian Vector calculus studies various differential operators defined on scalar or vector fields, which are typically expressed in terms of the del operator , also known as "nabla". The three basic vector operators are:  Operation	Notation	Description	Notational analogy	Domain/Range Gradient	 =\nabla f	Measures the rate and direction of change in a scalar field.	Scalar multiplication	Maps scalar fields to vector fields. Divergence	 	Measures the scalar of a source or sink at a given point in a vector field.	Dot product	Maps vector fields to scalar fields. Curl	.	Cross product	Maps vector fields to vector fields.  F denotes a vector field Also commonly used are the two Laplace operators:  Operation	Notation	Description	Domain/Range Laplacian	f=\nabla \cdot \nabla f	Measures the difference between the value of the scalar field with its average on infinitesimal balls.	Maps between scalar fields. Vector Laplacian		Measures the difference between the value of the vector field with its average on infinitesimal balls.	Maps between vector fields.  F denotes a vector field A quantity called the Jacobian is useful for studying functions when both the domain and range of the function are multivariable, such as a change of variables during integration.  Integral theorems The three basic vector operators have corresponding theorems which generalize the fundamental theorem of calculus to higher dimensions:  Theorem	Statement	Description Gradient theorem	 \right)	The line integral of the gradient of a scalar field equals the difference in the values of the scalar field at the endpoints of the curve. Divergence theorem		The integral of the divergence of a vector field over an n-dimensional solid equals the flux of the vector field through the -dimensional closed surface bounding the solid. Curl  theorem	 equals the line integral of the vector field over the closed curve bounding the surface.  F denotes a vector field In two dimensions, the divergence and curl theorems reduce to the Green's theorem:  Theorem	Statement	Description Green's theorem	 equals the flux or line integral of the vector field over the closed curve bounding the region. For divergence, . L and M are functions of . Applications Linear approximations Main article: Linear approximation Linear approximations are used to replace complicated functions with linear functions that are almost the same. Given a differentiable function   by the formula   The right-hand side is the equation of the plane tangent to the graph of  .  Optimization Main article: Mathematical optimization For a continuously differentiable function of several real variables, a point P  is critical if all of the partial derivatives of the function are zero at P, or, equivalently, if its gradient is zero. The critical values are the values of the function at the critical points.  If the function is smooth, or, at least twice continuously differentiable, a critical point may be either a local maximum, a local minimum or a saddle point. The different cases may be distinguished by considering the eigenvalues of the  essian matrix of second derivatives.  By Fermat's theorem, all local maxima and minima of a differentiable function occur at critical points. Therefore, to find the local maxima and minima, it suffices, theoretically, to compute the zeros of the gradient and the eigenvalues of the  essian matrix at these zeros.  Physics and engineering Vector calculus is particularly useful in studying:  Center of mass Field theory Kinematics Maxwell's equations Generalizations Different -manifolds Vector calculus is initially defined for Euclidean -space, , which has additional structure beyond simply being a -dimensional real vector space, namely: a norm , which in turn gives a notion of angle, and an orientation, which gives a notion of left-handed and right-handed. These structures give rise to a volume form, and also the cross product, which is used pervasively in vector calculus.  The gradient and divergence require only the inner product, while the curl and the cross product also requires the handedness of the coordinate system to be taken into account .  Vector calculus can be defined on other -dimensional real vector spaces if they have an inner product .  More generally, vector calculus can be defined on any -dimensional oriented Riemannian manifold, or more generally pseudo-Riemannian manifold. This structure simply means that the tangent space at each point has an inner product  and an orientation, or more globally that there is a symmetric nondegenerate metric tensor and an orientation, and works because vector calculus is defined in terms of tangent vectors at each point.  Other dimensions Most of the analytic results are easily understood, in a more general form, using the machinery of differential geometry, of which vector calculus forms a subset. Grad and div generalize immediately to other dimensions, as do the gradient theorem, divergence theorem, and Laplacian , while curl and cross product do not generalize as directly.  From a general point of view, the various fields in vectors.  In any dimension, assuming a nondegenerate form, grad of a scalar function is a vector field, and div of a vector field is a scalar function, but only in dimension  or   .  There are two important alternative generalizations of vector calculus. The first, geometric algebra, uses k-vector fields instead of vector fields . Geometric algebra is mostly used in generalizations of physics and other applied fields to higher dimensions.  The second generalization uses differential forms  instead of vector fields or k-vector fields, and is widely used in mathematics, particularly in differential geometry, geometric topology, and harmonic analysis, in particular yielding  odge theory on oriented pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. From this point of view, grad, curl, and div correspond to the exterior derivative of -forms, -forms, and -forms, respectively, and the key theorems of vector calculus are all special cases of the general form of Stokes' theorem.  From the point of view of both of these generalizations, vector calculus implicitly identifies mathematically distinct objects, which makes the presentation simpler but the underlying mathematical structure and generalizations less clear. From the point of view of geometric algebra, vector calculus implicitly identifies k-vector fields with vector fields or scalar functions: -vectors and -vectors with scalars, -vectors and -vectors with vectors. From the point of view of differential forms, vector calculus implicitly identifies k-forms with scalar fields or vector fields: -forms and -forms with scalar fields, -forms and -forms with vector fields. Thus for example the curl naturally takes as input a vector field or -form, but naturally has as output a -vector field or -form , which is then interpreted as a vector field, rather than directly taking a vector field to a vector field; this is reflected in the curl of a vector field in higher dimensions not having as output a vector field.      