Algebra From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Algebraist" redirects here. For the novel by Iain M. Banks, see The Algebraist. For the kind of algebraic structure, see Algebra over a field.  The quadratic formula expresses the solution of the degree two equation ax + bx + c = , where a is not zero, in terms of its coefficients a, b and c. Algebra (from Arabic "al-jabr" literally meaning "reunion of broken parts" As such, it includes everything from elementary equation solving to the study of abstractions such as groups, rings, and fields. The more basic parts of algebra are called elementary algebra; the more abstract parts are called abstract algebra or modern algebra. Elementary algebra is generally considered to be essential for any study of mathematics, science, or engineering, as well as such applications as medicine and economics. Abstract algebra is a major area in advanced mathematics, studied primarily by professional mathematicians.  Elementary algebra differs from arithmetic in the use of abstractions, such as using letters to stand for numbers that are either unknown or allowed to take on many values. For example, in  c is a constant, the speed of light in a vacuum. Algebra gives methods for writing formulas and solving equations that are much clearer and easier than the older method of writing everything out in words.  The word algebra is also used in certain specialized ways. A special kind of mathematical object in abstract algebra is called an "algebra", and the word is used, for example, in the phrases linear algebra and algebraic topology.  A mathematician who does research in algebra is called an algebraist.  Contents 	Etymology 	Different meanings of "algebra" 	Algebra as a branch of mathematics 	 istory .	Early history of algebra .	Modern history of algebra 	Areas of mathematics with the word algebra in their name 	Elementary algebra .	Polynomials .	Education 	Abstract algebra .	Groups .	Rings and fields 	See also 	Notes 	References 	External links Etymology The word algebra comes from the Arabic リァルャリィリア  from the title of the book Ilm al-jabr wa'l-mu盧ウト｜ala by the Persian mathematician and astronomer al-Khwarizmi. The word entered the English language during the fifteenth century, from either Spanish, Italian, or Medieval Latin. It originally referred to the surgical procedure of setting broken or dislocated bones. The mathematical meaning was first recorded in the sixteenth century.  Different meanings of "algebra" The word "algebra" has several related meanings in mathematics, as a single word or with qualifiers.  As a single word without an article, "algebra" names a broad part of mathematics. As a single word with an article or in plural, "an algebra" or "algebras" denotes a specific mathematical structure, whose precise definition depends on the author. Usually the structure has an addition, multiplication, and a scalar multiplication . When some authors use the term "algebra", they make a subset of the following additional assumptions: associative, commutative, unital, and/or finite-dimensional. In universal algebra, the word "algebra" refers to a generalization of the above concept, which allows for n-ary operations. With a qualifier, there is the same distinction: Without an article, it means a part of algebra, such as linear algebra, elementary algebra . With an article, it means an instance of some abstract structure, like a Lie algebra, an associative algebra, or a vertex operator algebra. Sometimes both meanings exist for the same qualifier, as in the sentence: Commutative algebra is the study of commutative rings, which are commutative algebras over the integers. Algebra as a branch of mathematics Algebra began with computations similar to those of arithmetic, with letters standing for numbers. This allowed proofs of properties that are true no matter which numbers are involved. For example, in the quadratic equation  +bx+c=,  x which satisfy the equation. That is to say, to find all the solutions of the equation.   istorically, and in current teaching, the study of algebra starts with the solving of equations such as the quadratic equation above. Then more general questions, such as "does an equation have a solution?", "how many solutions does an equation have?", "what can be said about the nature of the solutions?" are considered. These questions lead to ideas of form, structure and symmetry. This development permitted algebra to be extended to consider non-numerical objects, such as vectors, matrices, and polynomials. The structural properties of these non-numerical objects were then abstracted to define algebraic structures such as groups, rings, and fields.  Before the th century, mathematics was divided into only two subfields, arithmetic and geometry. Even though some methods, which had been developed much earlier, may be considered nowadays as algebra, the emergence of algebra and, soon thereafter, of infinitesimal calculus as subfields of mathematics only dates from the th or th century. From the second half of th century on, many new fields of mathematics appeared, most of which made use of both arithmetic and geometry, and almost all of which used algebra.  Today, algebra has grown until it includes many branches of mathematics, as can be seen in the Mathematics Subject Classification where none of the first level areas  is called algebra. Today algebra includes section -General algebraic systems, -Field theory and polynomials, -Commutative algebra, -Linear and multilinear algebra; matrix theory, -Associative rings and algebras, -Nonassociative rings and algebras, -Category theory; homological algebra, -K-theory and -Group theory. Algebra is also used extensively in -Number theory and -Algebraic geometry.   istory Main articles:  istory of algebra and Timeline of algebra Early history of algebra  A page from Al-Khwト〉izmトォ's al-Kitト｜ al-mu盧ォta盪」ar fトォ 盧・isト｜ al-ト歛br wa-l-muqト｜ala The roots of algebra can be traced to the ancient Babylonians,  By the time of Plato, Greek mathematics had undergone a drastic change. The Greeks created a geometric algebra where terms were represented by sides of geometric objects, usually lines, that had letters associated with them. and have led, in number theory to the modern notion of Diophantine equation.  Earlier traditions discussed above had a direct influence on the Persian mathematician Mu盧・ammad ibn Mナォsトal-Khwārizmī .  e later wrote The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing, which established algebra as a mathematical discipline that is independent of geometry and arithmetic.  The  ellenistic mathematicians  ero of Alexandria and Diophantus  In the context where algebra is identified with the theory of equations, the Greek mathematician Diophantus has traditionally been known as the "father of algebra" and in context where it is identified with rules for manipulating and solving equations, Persian mathematician al-Khwarizmi is regarded as "the father of algebra".  Another Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam is credited with identifying the foundations of algebraic geometry and found the general geometric solution of the cubic equation.  is book Treatise on Demonstrations of Problems of Algebra , which laid down the principles of algebra, is part of the body of Persian mathematics that was eventually transmitted to Europe. As the Islamic world was declining, the European world was ascending. And it is here that algebra was further developed.  Modern history of algebra  Italian mathematician Girolamo Cardano published the solutions to the cubic and quartic equations in his  book Ars magna. François Viète's work on new algebra at the close of the th century was an important step towards modern algebra. In , René Descartes published La Géométrie, inventing analytic geometry and introducing modern algebraic notation. Another key event in the further development of algebra was the general algebraic solution of the cubic and quartic equations, developed in the mid-th century. The idea of a determinant was developed by Japanese mathematician Seki Kōwa in the th century, followed independently by Gottfried Leibniz ten years later, for the purpose of solving systems of simultaneous linear equations using matrices. Gabriel Cramer also did some work on matrices and determinants in the th century. Permutations were studied by Joseph-Louis Lagrange in his  paper Réflexions sur la résolution algébrique des équations devoted to solutions of algebraic equations, in which he introduced Lagrange resolvents. Paolo Ruffini was the first person to develop the theory of permutation groups, and like his predecessors, also in the context of solving algebraic equations.  Abstract algebra was developed in the th century, deriving from the interest in solving equations, initially focusing on what is now called Galois theory, and on constructibility issues.  Areas of mathematics with the word algebra in their name Some areas of mathematics that fall under the classification abstract algebra have the word algebra in their name; linear algebra is one example. Others do not: group theory, ring theory, and field theory are examples. In this section, we list some areas of mathematics with the word "algebra" in the name.  Elementary algebra, the part of algebra that is usually taught in elementary courses of mathematics. Abstract algebra, in which algebraic structures such as groups, rings and fields are axiomatically defined and investigated. Linear algebra, in which the specific properties of linear equations, vector spaces and matrices are studied. Boolean algebra, a branch of algebra abstracting the computation with the truth values false and true. Commutative algebra, the study of commutative rings. Computer algebra, the implementation of algebraic methods as algorithms and computer programs.  omological algebra, the study of algebraic structures that are fundamental to study topological spaces. Universal algebra, in which properties common to all algebraic structures are studied. Algebraic number theory, in which the properties of numbers are studied from an algebraic point of view. Algebraic geometry, a branch of geometry, in its primitive form specifying curves and surfaces as solutions of polynomial equations. Algebraic combinatorics, in which algebraic methods are used to study combinatorial questions. Relational algebra: a set of finitary relations that is closed under certain operators. Many mathematical structures are called algebras:  Algebra over a field or more generally algebra over a ring. Many classes of algebras over a field or over a ring have a specific name: Associative algebra Non-associative algebra Lie algebra  opf algebra C*-algebra Symmetric algebra Exterior algebra Tensor algebra In measure theory, Sigma-algebra Algebra over a set In category theory F-algebra and F-coalgebra T-algebra In logic, Relation algebra, a residuated Boolean algebra expanded with an involution called converse. Boolean algebra, a complemented distributive lattice.  eyting algebra Elementary algebra Main article: Elementary algebra  Algebraic expression notation:    – power     – coefficient    – term    – operator    – constant term   x y c – variables/constants Elementary algebra is the most basic form of algebra. It is taught to students who are presumed to have no knowledge of mathematics beyond the basic principles of arithmetic. In arithmetic, only numbers and their arithmetical operations . This is useful because:  It allows the general formulation of arithmetical laws , and thus is the first step to a systematic exploration of the properties of the real number system. It allows the reference to "unknown" numbers, the formulation of equations and the study of how to solve these.  It allows the formulation of functional relationships.  Polynomials  The graph of a polynomial function of degree . Main article: Polynomial A polynomial is an expression that is the sum of a finite number of non-zero terms, each term consisting of the product of a constant and a finite number of variables raised to whole number powers. For example, x + x −  is a polynomial in the single variable x. A polynomial expression is an expression that may be rewritten as a polynomial, by using commutativity, associativity and distributivity of addition and multiplication. For example,  is a polynomial expression, that, properly speaking, is not a polynomial. A polynomial function is a function that is defined by a polynomial, or, equivalently, by a polynomial expression. The two preceding examples define the same polynomial function.  Two important and related problems in algebra are the factorization of polynomials, that is, expressing a given polynomial as a product of other polynomials that can not be factored any further, and the computation of polynomial greatest common divisors. The example polynomial above can be factored as . A related class of problems is finding algebraic expressions for the roots of a polynomial in a single variable.  Education See also: Mathematics education It has been suggested that elementary algebra should be taught to students as young as eleven years old,  owever, in some US schools, algebra is started in ninth grade.  Abstract algebra Main articles: Abstract algebra and Algebraic structure Abstract algebra extends the familiar concepts found in elementary algebra and arithmetic of numbers to more general concepts.  ere are listed fundamental concepts in abstract algebra.  Sets: Rather than just considering the different types of numbers, abstract algebra deals with the more general concept of sets: a collection of all objects , the set of all two dimensional vectors in the plane, and the various finite groups such as the cyclic groups, which are the groups of integers modulo n. Set theory is a branch of logic and not technically a branch of algebra.  Binary operations: The notion of addition  can be binary operations when defined on different sets, as are addition and multiplication of matrices, vectors, and polynomials.  Identity elements: The numbers zero and one are abstracted to give the notion of an identity element for an operation. Zero is the identity element for addition and one is the identity element for multiplication. For a general binary operator ∗ the identity element e must satisfy a ∗ e = a and e ∗ a = a, and is necessarily unique, if it exists. This holds for addition as a +  = a and  + a = a and multiplication a ×  = a and  × a = a. Not all sets and operator combinations have an identity element; for example, the set of positive natural numbers  has no identity element for addition.  Inverse elements: The negative numbers give rise to the concept of inverse elements. For addition, the inverse of a is written −a, and for multiplication the inverse is written a−. A general two-sided inverse element a− satisfies the property that a ∗ a− = e and a− ∗ a = e, where e is the identity element.  Associativity: Addition of integers has a property called associativity. That is, the grouping of the numbers to be added does not affect the sum. For example: . This property is shared by most binary operations, but not subtraction or division or octonion multiplication.  Commutativity: Addition and multiplication of real numbers are both commutative. That is, the order of the numbers does not affect the result. For example:  +  =  + . In general, this becomes a ∗ b = b ∗ a. This property does not hold for all binary operations. For example, matrix multiplication and quaternion multiplication are both non-commutative.  Groups Main article: Group  See also: Group theory and Examples of groups Combining the above concepts gives one of the most important structures in mathematics: a group. A group is a combination of a set S and a single binary operation ∗, defined in any way you choose, but with the following properties:  An identity element e exists, such that for every member a of S, e ∗ a and a ∗ e are both identical to a. Every element has an inverse: for every member a of S, there exists a member a− such that a ∗ a− and a− ∗ a are both identical to the identity element. The operation is associative: if a, b and c are members of S, then . If a group is also commutative—that is, for any two members a and b of S, a ∗ b is identical to b ∗ a—then the group is said to be abelian.  For example, the set of integers under the operation of addition is a group. In this group, the identity element is  and the inverse of any element a is its negation, −a. The associativity requirement is met, because for any integers a, b and c,   The nonzero rational numbers form a group under multiplication.  ere, the identity element is , since  × a = a ×  = a for any rational number a. The inverse of a is /a, since a × /a = .  The integers under the multiplication operation, however, do not form a group. This is because, in general, the multiplicative inverse of an integer is not an integer. For example,  is an integer, but its multiplicative inverse is ¼, which is not an integer.  The theory of groups is studied in group theory. A major result in this theory is the classification of finite simple groups, mostly published between about  and , which separates the finite simple groups into roughly  basic types.  Semigroups, quasigroups, and monoids are structures similar to groups, but more general. They comprise a set and a closed binary operation, but do not necessarily satisfy the other conditions. A semigroup has an associative binary operation, but might not have an identity element. A monoid is a semigroup which does have an identity but might not have an inverse for every element. A quasigroup satisfies a requirement that any element can be turned into any other by either a unique left-multiplication or right-multiplication; however the binary operation might not be associative.  All groups are monoids, and all monoids are semigroups.  Examples Set	Natural numbers N	Integers Z	Rational numbers Q 	Integers modulo : Z =  Operation	+	×  Closed	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes Identity						N/A		N/A		 Inverse	N/A	N/A	−a	N/A	−a	N/A	/a	N/A	, , , respectively	N/A, , , respectively Associative	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	No	Yes	No	Yes	Yes Commutative	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	No	Yes	No	Yes	Yes Structure	monoid	monoid	abelian group	monoid	abelian group	quasigroup	abelian group	quasigroup	abelian group	abelian group  Rings and fields Main articles: Ring  See also: Ring theory, Glossary of ring theory, Field theory , and Glossary of field theory Groups just have one binary operation. To fully explain the behaviour of the different types of numbers, structures with two operators need to be studied. The most important of these are rings, and fields.  A ring has two binary operations  identity element is written as  and the additive inverse of a is written as −a.  Distributivity generalises the distributive law for numbers. For the integers  = c × a + c × b, and × is said to be distributive over +.  The integers are an example of a ring. The integers have additional properties which make it an integral domain.  A field is a ring with the additional property that all the elements excluding  form an abelian group under ×. The multiplicative  identity is written as  and the multiplicative inverse of a is written as a−.  The rational numbers, the real numbers and the complex numbers are all examples of fields.   